Doctoral Consortium

AAMAS 2019, May 13-17, 2019, Montréal, Canada

Aspects of Transparency in Machine Learning
Doctoral Consortium
Martin Strobel
National University of Singapore
mstrobel@comp.nus.edu.sg

ABSTRACT

certain ethnic or gender groups). Government bodies and regulatory authorities have recently begun calling for algorithmic
transparency: providing human-interpretable explanations of
the underlying reasoning behind large-scale decision-making
algorithms. My thesis research will be concerned with issues
that arise from this research agenda. Especially, I’m interested in how to decide which explanation of a decision to trust
given that there are many, potentially conflicting, possible
explanations for any given decision. I’m also interested in
how transparency is in conflict with other desirable objectives
for machine learning an initial example is the privacy of the
training data

The fact that machine learning is growing more and more entrenched in almost every aspect of society, combined with the
opacity of various of its algorithms has induced the relatively
young research area of transparent machine learning. The
aim of this domain is to provide explanations for automated
decisions to increase public trust. In my thesis, I am going
to consider certain problems that arise from this research
agenda. Particularly, I so far considered, the dilemma of conflicting explanations and the issue of privacy concerns arising
from transparency.

KEYWORDS
1.1

Cooperative games: theory & analysis;Social choice theory;
Game theory for practical applications; Values in MAS (privacy, safety, security, transparency, . . . )
ACM Reference Format:
Martin Strobel. 2019. Aspects of Transparency in Machine Learning. In Proc. of the 18th International Conference on Autonomous
Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS 2019), Montreal, Canada,
May 13–17, 2019, IFAAMAS, 3 pages.

1

Monotone Influence Measures

In our initial work [16], we investigated influence measures:
these are functions that, given a dataset, assign a value to
every feature; this value should roughly correspond to the
feature’s importance in affecting the classification outcome
for individual data points. We identified a set of axioms that
any reasonable influence measure should satisfy. Given the
space constraints, here only a very brief overview of what
these axioms look like: some are concerned with geometric
manipulation of the data set i.e. behavior of the measure
under rotation or shifting of the data; we also considered
axioms concerning continuity and a form of monotonicity.
From these axioms, we derived a class of influence measures,
dubbed monotone influence measures (MIM), which uniquely
satisfied these axioms. Moreover, we showed that MIM is
interpretable as the optimal solution to a natural optimization
problem. Unlike most influence measures in the literature, we
assumed neither knowledge of the underlying decision-making
algorithm nor of its behavior on points outside the dataset.
Indeed, some methodologies are heavily reliant on access to
counterfactual information: what would the classifier have
done if some features were changed? This may be a strong
assumption in some cases, as it assumes not only access to the
classifier but also the potential ability to use it on nonsensical
data.1 Further, we conducted an analysis of several existing
measures based on our axioms, showing which of the axioms
are satisfied by existing measures and how they could be
improved accordingly. Finally, we showed that despite our
rather limiting conceptual framework, MIM does surprisingly
well on a sparse image dataset, and provides an interesting
analysis of a recidivism dataset. We showed that the outputs

INTRODUCTION

Recent years have seen the widespread implementation of
data-driven algorithms making decisions in increasingly highstakes domains, such as finance, healthcare, transportation,
and public safety. Using novel ML techniques, these algorithms are capable of processing massive amounts of data
and produce highly accurate predictions; however, their inherent complexity makes it increasingly difficult for humans
to understand certain decisions. Indeed, these algorithms are
black-box decision makers: their underlying decision processes
are either hidden from human scrutiny by proprietary law or
(as is often the case) their inner workings are so complicated
that even their designers will be hard-pressed to explain the
reasoning behind the algorithms decision-making processes.
By obfuscating their function, data-driven classifiers run the
prospect of exposing human stakeholders to risks. These may
include incorrect decisions (e.g. a loan application that was
wrongly rejected due to system error), information leaks (e.g.
an algorithm inadvertently uses information it should not
have used), or discrimination (e.g. biased decisions against
Proc. of the 18th International Conference on Autonomous Agents
and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS 2019), N. Agmon, M. E. Taylor,
E. Elkind, M. Veloso (eds.), May 13–17, 2019, Montreal, Canada. ©
2019 International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
Systems (www.ifaamas.org). All rights reserved.

1

For example, if the dataset consists of medical records of men and
women, the classifier might need to answer how it would handle pregnant men

2449

Doctoral Consortium

AAMAS 2019, May 13-17, 2019, Montréal, Canada

of MIM are comparable to those of other measures, and
provide interpretable results.

1.2

MIM assumes neither a specific algorithmic framework nor
access to counterfactual data. This results in a more generic,
albeit less powerful, explanatory framework.
The privacy in machine learning has gotten some attention. [10] use model explanations to efficiently reconstruct
a target model, the explanations considered is the gradient
with respect to the input and no conclusions are drawn about
the privacy of the training set. Our attack falls into the general area of membership inference attacks. [15] train shadow
models to infer membership of data points to the training
set given query access to basic predictions of models. [21]
analyze the effect of over-fitting and influence on the ability
to infer membership to the training set.

Transparency in Conflict with Privacy

[14] have shown that predictions of machine learning models
can be exploited to infer if a certain data point was used
to train the model. This privacy violation can have serious
consequences. In ongoing work, we asked if commonly used
transparency measures leak similar information about the
training data. Our analysis indicates that this is indeed the
case in for specific explanations in certain situations.

1.3

Related Work

Algorithmic transparency has been debated and called for
by government bodies [8, 17], the legal community [12, 19],
and the media [2, 7]. The AI and ML research community is
part of the conversation: several ongoing research efforts are
informing the design of explainable AI systems (e.g. [9, 22]),
as well as tools that explain the behavior of existing black-box
systems (see [20] for an overview); our initial work focuses
on the latter.
Existing results closely related to our initial work are from
Datta et al.. They axiomatically characterize an influence
measure for datasets; however, in their work influence is interpreted as a global measure (e.g., what importance had
’age’ for all decisions as a whole); we focused on feature
importance for individual data points. Further, it has been
shown by Datta et al. that the measure proposed by Datta
et al. outputs undesirable values (e.g. zero influence) in many
real instances; this is due to the fact that the Datta et al.
measure relies on the existence of potentially counterfactual
data: data points that differ from one another by only a single
feature. This becomes especially problematic in situations
with many features or sparse data. A data-based influence
measure relying on a potential like approach has been proposed by Baehrens et al.. However, we could demonstrate
that their approach fails to satisfy reasonable properties even
on basic datasets.
Another stream of research assumes access to the classifier, which allows querying classifications for additional data
points. Datta et al. use an axiomatically justified approach
based on an economic paradigm of fairness to measure influence, called QII; briefly, QII perturbs feature values and
observes the effect this has on the classification outcome.
Another line of work using black-box access [11] uses queries
to the classifier in a local region near the point of interest in
order to measure influence. Adler et al. equate the influence
of a given feature 𝑖 with the ability to infer 𝑖’s value from the
rest of features, after it has been obscured; this idea is the
basis for a framework for auditing black-box models based
on statistical analysis. However, this approach assumes that
one can make predictions on a dataset with some features
removed. Finally, Sundararajan et al. provide a framework
for explaining the behavior of black-box systems using a
notion of economic fair allocation; however, their analysis
assumes that the underlying classifier is a neural network.

2

PLANS FOR THE FUTURE

Both aspects touched on in this abstract need further exploration. Axiomatic approaches to influence measurement
are common in economic domains. Of particular note are
axiomatic approaches in cooperative game theory [4, 13]; we
have started exploring the relation of MIM to game-theoretic
influence, but there is much more potential in applying gametheoretic concepts in this new domain.
Further, we currently only consider binary classifications, a
generalization into a multi-class our even regression domain is
desirable and far from trivial. Besides the generalization of our
axioms, it also requires a discussion of what ’closeness’ means
in those situations and what accounts as a positive or negative
influence. Another major limitation of our current work is that
it only focuses on single feature influence and largely ignores
synergistic effects between features. Here existing work on
coalition formation in cooperative game theory might help
us to obtain further insights. Nevertheless, to axiomatize
the pairwise interactions between features would be a major
theoretical challenge.
Finally, these potential new measures would surely be more
involved, and so harder to understand for humans. The study
of this trade-off between understandability and explanatory
power is another question we want to further analyze.
For the conflict between privacy and transparency, besides
concluding our current work with formal results, it would
be of interest to consider countermeasures or to focus on
the existing measures which are robust against our attacks,
showing formal privacy guarantees.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author would like to thank his supervisor Prof. Yair
Zick and Prof. Reza Shokri for their constant support and
guidance.

REFERENCES
[1] P Adler, C Falk, S A Friedler, G Rybeck, C Scheidegger, B Smith,
and S Venkatasubramanian. 2018. Auditing black-box models for
indirect influence. In Knowledge and Information Systems.
[2] J Angwin, J Larson, S Mattu, and L Kirchner. 2016. Machine
Bias There’s software used across the country to predict future
criminals. And it’s biased against blacks. ProPublica (may 2016).
https://goo.gl/sRA6bg

2450

Doctoral Consortium

AAMAS 2019, May 13-17, 2019, Montréal, Canada

[14] Reza Shokri, Marco Stronati, Congzheng Song, and Vitaly
Shmatikov. 2017. Membership Inference Attacks Against Machine
Learning Models. Proceedings - IEEE Symposium on Security
and Privacy (2017), 3–18. https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2017.41
arXiv:1610.05820
[15] Reza Shokri, Marco Stronati, Congzheng Song, and Vitaly
Shmatikov. 2017. Membership Inference Attacks Against Machine
Learning Models. In Proceedings of the 38th IEEE Conference
on Security and Privacy (Oakland). https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.
2017.41 arXiv:1610.05820
[16] J Sliwinski, M Strobel, and Y Zick. 2019. Axiomatic Characterization of Data-Driven Influence Measures for Classification. In Proceedings of the 33rd AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(AAAI). arXiv:1708.02153 http://arxiv.org/abs/1708.02153
[17] M Smith, D Patil, and Muñoz C. 2016. Big Data: A Report on
Algorithmic Systems, Opportunity, and Civil Rights. White House
Report. https://goo.gl/WbgMnK
[18] M Sundararajan, A Taly, and Q Yan. 2017. Axiomatic Attribution
for Deep Networks. In Proceedings of the 34th International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML).
[19] N Suzor. 2015. Google defamation case highlights complex
jurisdiction problem. The Conversation (oct 2015). https:
//goo.gl/XS1Z6y
[20] A Weller. 2017. Challenges for Transparency. CoRR abs/1708.0
(2017).
[21] Samuel Yeom, Irene Giacomelli, Matt Fredrikson, and Somesh
Jha. 2017. Privacy Risk in Machine Learning: Analyzing the
Connection to Overfitting. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.01604
(2017). arXiv:1709.01604 http://arxiv.org/abs/1709.01604
[22] J Zeng, B Ustun, and C Rudin. 2017. Interpretable classification
models for recidivism prediction. Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society: Series A (Statistics in Society) 180, 3 (2017), 689–722.

[3] David Baehrens, Timon Schroeter, Stefan Harmeling, Motoaki
Kawanabe, Katja Hansen, and Klaus-Robert Mueller. 2009. How
to Explain Individual Classification Decisions. Journal of Machine Learning Research 11 (2009). arXiv:0912.1128 http://arxiv.
org/abs/0912.1128
[4] J F Banzhaf. 1965. Weighted Voting Doesn’t Work: a Mathematical Analysis. Rutgers Law Review 19 (1965), 317–343.
[5] A Datta, A Datta, A D Procaccia, and Y Zick. 2015. Influence in
Classification via Cooperative Game Theory. In Proceedings of the
24th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(IJCAI).
[6] A Datta, S Sen, and Y Zick. 2016. Algorithmic Transparency via
Quantitative Input Influence. In Proceedings of the 37th IEEE
Conference on Security and Privacy (Oakland).
[7] J M Hofman, A Sharma, and D J Watts. 2017. Prediction and
explanation in social systems. Science 355, 6324 (2017), 486–488.
[8] F Hollande. 2016. Pour une République numérique (1). (oct 2016).
https://goo.gl/jnE1tQ
[9] J A Kroll, J Huey, S Barocas, E Felten, J R Reidenberg, D G
Robinson, and and H. Yu. 2017. Accountable Algorithms. University of Pennsylvania Law Review 165, 3 (2017).
[10] Smitha Milli, Ludwig Schmidt, Anca D. Dragan, and Moritz
Hardt. 2018. Model Reconstruction from Model Explanations.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.05185 (2018). arXiv:1807.05185 http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1807.05185
[11] M T Ribeiro, S Singh, and C Guestrin. 2016. Why Should I Trust
You?: Explaining the Predictions of Any Classifier. In Proceedings
of the 22nd International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data mining.
[12] C J Roggensack and J Abrahamson. 2016. Wisconsin v. Loomis.
(2016). https://goo.gl/S35mD6
[13] L S Shapley. 1953. A Value for 𝑛-Person Games. In Contributions
to the Theory of Games, vol. 2. Princeton University Press, 307–
317.

2451

