EU Trade Secrets Law and Algorithmic Transparency
Mariateresa Maggiolino*
1.

Introduction

When the words “transparency” and “algorithms” are placed in the same sentence, two kinds of
issues arise. On the one hand, one may worry about the transparency produced by algorithms, as
antitrust scholars do when they deal with algorithmic collusion,1 or as privacy scholars do when
they express concerns about the personal and sensitive data that algorithms may infer without
individuals’ consent.2 On the other hand, one may question – as this paper does – if and when
transparency is or should be a feature of algorithms. Indeed, in a world where algorithms support
or make an increasing number of public and private decisions, mistaken, unfair, discriminatory, or
manipulated choices are not negligible details. On the contrary, they can produce serious impacts
on citizens’ lives, by undermining individuals’ self-determination and free choice, or by preventing
them from having access to key goods, such as financial products or health-related services.3
Therefore, to hold someone responsible for possible bad algorithmic outcomes, algorithms must
be transparent as so to enable individuals, courts, and authorities to look inside them.4
However, as algorithms are often designed by private companies, they do not born transparent. To
be sure, their developers know the sequence of commands of which algorithms are made, at least
partially and before any machine-learning technique starts adding new instructions to the already
engineered structure of orders.5 Yet, other employees, companies’ rivals, companies’ customers,
consumers, or the public in general do not know these ganglia. In addition, while at work, good
algorithms frequently produce significant competitive advantages that would turn into relevant
economic losses, had the algorithms been revealed. Therefore, to appropriate the results of their
investments, companies are not willing to share algorithms with competitors, either directly or via
third parties, such as employees, users, or customers, even when the last are public administrations.
Rather, companies want and act to keep algorithms secret and confidential. After all, as the most
popular examples of Google’s PageRank and Facebook’s EdgeRank show, algorithms are not self-

* Associate professor of commercial law and Director of the Integrated Master of Arts in Law, Bocconi University,
Milan.
1
See, EZRACHI, STUCKE, Algorithmic Collusion: Problems and Counter-Measures 2017,
https://www.oecd.org/officialdocuments/publicdisplaydocumentpdf/?cote=DAF/COMP/WD%282017%2925&docL
anguage=En
2
See, TENE, POLONETSKY, Big Data for All: Privacy and User Control in the Age of Analytics, in Northwestern
Journal of Technology and Intellectual Property 2013, 239.
3
See footnotes 14-16 and the accompanying text.
4
See footnotes 17-22 and the accompanying text.
5
Machine learning is any methodology and set of techniques that works on data to come up with new patterns and
models that can be effectively predictive. Thus, machine learning is defined by the capacity to define or modify
decision-making rules autonomously. See, e.g., VAN OTTERLO, A machine learning view on profiling, in
HILDEBRANDT, DE VRIES (eds) Privacy, Due Process and the Computational Turn-Philosophers of Law Meet
Philosophers of Technology 2013, 41.

1

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3363178

disclosing objects:6 even de facto secrecy can work to shield them, because users, customers, and
even competitors cannot easily make any form of reverse engineering.
On the other hand, modern legal systems do recognize the need of companies to defend their
competitive advantages, by granting legal protection to de facto secrecy, that is, by turning firms’
ability to exclude others from getting access to their valuable knowledge into a legal power.7 For
example, Article 39 of the TRIPS Agreement of 1994 (Uruguay Round) sets a basic definition of
trade secrets and a minimum level of judicial protection8 to be afforded by its signatory Countries.9
In the United States, in 2016 the Congress passed the Defend Trade Secrets Act (DTSA) to
federalize national trade secrecy laws and provide firms operating across the Country with higher
levels of uniformity and legal certainty. Indeed, the DTSA creates a private cause of action in
federal courts for trade secret holders when the misappropriated trade secret is related to a product
or service used in, or intended to be used in, interstate or foreign commerce. 10 In the same year,
also the European Parliament approved and the Council adopted Directive (EU) 2016/943 on the
protection of undisclosed know how and business information (trade secrets) against their unlawful
acquisition, use and disclosure (hereinafter, “the Directive”).11 With the ultimate goal of spurring
innovation and knowledge dissemination within the internal market, also the EU institutions
wanted to harmonize national trade secrets laws.12 Thus, the Directive offers a unifying notion of
6

LEMLEY, The Surprising Virtues of Treating Trade Secrets as IP Rights, in Stanford Law Review 2008, 314; and
GUGLIELMETTI, La tutela del segreto, in GALLI, VANZETTI (eds), Le nuove frontiere del diritto dei brevetti 2003,
109, 110.
7
ALMELING, Seven reasons why trade secrets are increasingly important, in Berkeley Technology Law Journal.
Berkeley 2012, 1098 (observing that recently an increasing number of firms is not satisfied with de facto secrecy,
because the improvement of digital technology has been making the misappropriation of trade secrets be easier). In
this regard, see also MACAFEE, Net losses: Estimating the global cost of cybercrime, economic impact of cybercrime
2014,
https://csis-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fspublic/legacy_files/files/attachments/140609_rp_economic_impact_cybercrime_report.pdf
8

Article 39 protects trade secrets against unfair competition and establishes that, in order to be protected as a trade
secret, a piece of information must be confidential and with a commercial value deriving directly from both its
confidentiality and the measures that the owner has adopted in order to protect it.
9
Pursuant to Council Decision 94/800/EC, the EU and all its Member States are bound to the 1994 version of the
TRIPS Agreement.
10
True, since 1979 US companies have benefitted from the Uniform Trade Secrets Act (UTSA) codifying the several
national laws into a harmonized text. Yet, the UTSA was not a federal or national law: it acquired binding power as
long as national legislatures adopted it, because the UTSA was proposed by the National Conference of
Commissioners on Uniform State Law that lacks any direct legislative authority itself. See GAIDO, The trade secrets
protection in U.S. and in Europe: a comparative study, in Revista la Proprietad Immaterial 2017, 129.
11
OJ 2016 L 157/1. See, COOK, The Proposal for a Directive on the Protection of Trade Secrets in EU Legislation,
in Journal of Intellectual Property Rights 2014, 54; KNAAK, KUR, HILTY, Comments of the Max Planck Institution
for Innovation and Competition of 14 June 2014 on the Proposal of the European Commission for a Directive on the
Protection of Undisclosed Know-How and Business Information (Trade Secrets) Against Their Unlawful Acquisition,
Use and Disclosure of 28 November 2013, COM(2013) 813 Final, in IIC 2014, 953; TORREMANS, The Road
towards the Harmonization of Trade Secrets Law in the European Union, in Revista La Propiedad Inmaterial 2015,
31; FALCE, Trade Secrets – Looking for (Full) Harmonization in the Innovation Union, in IIC 2015, 940 and Id,
Tecniche di protezione delle informazioni riservate. Dagli Accordi TRIPS alla Direttiva sul segreto industriale, in Dir.
ind. 20016, 129.
12
As to the differences among the trade secrets laws of Member States that the Directive intends to reconcile see
Recitals 6-7. However, SURBLYTE, Enhancing TRIPS: Trade Secrets and Reverse Engineering, in HULLRICH,
HILTY, LAMPING, DREXL (eds), TRIPS plus 20: From Trade Rules to Market Principles 2016, 725 and ff. (arguing
that Directive should have focused more on substantial elements).

2

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3363178

trade secrets, sets the boundaries of the related protection, and establishes a sufficient and
comparable level of redress across the internal market.13
In the wake of such a renewed interest for trade secrets protection, first the paper intends to discuss
whether secret algorithms may enjoy the legal protection afforded by the Directive and, second, it
wants to asses whether and under what circumstances the Directive allows algorithmic
transparency. Indeed, what has been said above shows that the legal boundaries of algorithmic
transparency can only spring off from conflicting interests that equally deserve legal protection:
on the one hand, the interest of individuals in relating to accountable algorithms and, on the other
hand, the general interest in fostering innovation and cross-border dissemination of knowledge.
Hence, the paper proceeds as follows: paragraphs 2 briefly recalls how algorithms can be
conceptualized of; paragraph 3 summarizes the problems that many scholars would like to avoid
by imposing algorithmic transparency; paragraph 4 analyzes if algorithms can be protected as trade
secrets within the meaning of the Directive; paragraph 5 details the boundaries of EU trade secrets
protection in relation to algorithms; paragraph 6 indicates the extent to which the Directive grants
a leeway to algorithmic transparency; and paragraph 7 concludes, by arguing that the most
important sources of algorithmic transparency lay outside EU Trade Secret law.
2.

Algorithms in the data economy

For mathematicians and computer scientists an algorithm is a compound control structure,14 finite,
abstract, effective, imperatively given, and accomplishing a given purpose under given provisions.
In other words, an algorithm is a set of precise rules describing a computation process that, when
executed, proceeds from an input, goes through a finite number of well-defined steps, and
eventually produces an output. Thus, even before the advent of the data economy, an algorithm
has always consisted in a sequence of orders and instructions, called to detail a procedure or a
decision process meant to realize a given task.
However, with the flourishing of firms collecting big data, the word “algorithm” has acquired a
more specific – to some extent, narrower – nuance. It does not indicate any mathematical construct
that describes the operations to follow to achieve a given objective. It refers to how the said orders
and commands are practically implemented and combined into a particular program, software, or
information system,15 with the ultimate goal of inferring from data the answers to be given to a
specific set of questions. Indeed, the availability of huge amounts of different data, often gathered
in real time, has given firms a twofold opportunity: the chance to analyze those data to infer new
pieces knowledge; and the (consequent) possibility to further elaborate that knowledge to improve
their decision-making processes, offer new products and services, sell new packages of data; and
provide consumers with information in the shape of search engine results, recommendations,
rankings, or reviews. In such a scenario, hence, the word “algorithm” is used to refer to the
automated tools that, supported by the gigantic computational power, firms use, in lieu of human

13

For a detailed analysis of the enforcement rules set forth by the Directive see ARCIDIACONO, Prospettive di
adeguamento del diritto italiano alla direttiva Trade Secrets, in Rivista ODC 2016, 23 and ff..
14
CLELAND, Recipes, algorithms, programs, in Minds and Machines 2001, 219.
15
HILL, What an algorithm is, in Philosophy & Technology 2015, 35, 47; and GUREVICH, What is an algorithm?
2011, https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/762f/178c7983d7431d04919453c043760d691366.pdf.

3

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3363178

analysis and human decision-making, to elaborate (big) data and the information inferred from
them.
This is why today it is almost a common place to state that, in the data economy, choices and
actions previously left to humans are increasingly delegated to algorithms, which may suggest, if
not decide, how data should be understood and what activities should be carried on as a result.
The present public debate about algorithmic transparency mirrors the many concerns that this
passage to algorithmic decision-making has been raising among legal scholars, especially when
the algorithms at stake rely on learning capacities.16 The last, by granting algorithms some degree
of autonomy, make them less predictable and explainable – in a word, less accountable.
3.

The reasons to stand for algorithmic transparency

Today, both in the private and in the public sector, algorithms mediate an increasing number of
decisions. Often, they are used to make sense of data, and to profile and classify individuals in
different clusters, which afterwards become the targets of differentiated goods and activities. For
example, diverse clusters of individuals have access to dissimilar products and services, such as
the TV series to watch, the persons to mate, or the news to read. More, today these classifications
of individuals serve to decide also who can receive a loan or how serious a conviction should be.17
Such a state of affairs raises many concerns. Firstly, consider that often the data that algorithms
process are not open and thus the evidence upon which algorithms achieve their inferences cannot
be tested and verified. Secondly, as any other inductive process, also the algorithmic analysis leads
to uncertain results – better, to results whose truth is at most a statistical truth. Thirdly, algorithms
are humans’ artifacts. Therefore, not only are they fallible; also, they are value-laden.18 Fourthly,
algorithms may be manipulated for commercial or political reasons.19 Lastly, even when unbiased,
16

TUTT, An FDA for algorithms 2016, http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2747994.
In some States on the other side of the Atlantic Ocean, algorithmic risk assessment tools have already been used in
parole, pre-trial, and sentencing determinations. In Wisconsin, the case of Eric Loomis caused a sensation. The man
was found driving a car involved in a shooting. He was arrested, and pleaded guilty to eluding an officer. In
determining his sentence, the judge looked not only to Loomis' criminal record, but also to his score as it was assigned
by an algorithm named COMPAS. This tool is said to predict the defendant’s risk of being a recidivist. COMPAS
classified Loomis as high-risk of re-offending and the judge gave him a 6-year sentence. Loomis appealed the ruling
by claiming the violation of the due process principle, because the judge used an algorithm whose operations were
protected by trade secret law. The appeal went up to the Wisconsin Supreme Court, who ruled against Loomis, by
noting that the sentence would have been the same had COMPAS never been consulted. Many scholars, however,
have highly criticized the judgment as well as the use of the secret algorithm. See, e.g., BAGARIC, WOLF, Sentencing
by computer: enhancing sentencing transparency and predictability, and (possibly) bridging the gap between
sentencing knowledge and practice, forthcoming in George Mason Law Review 2018; and CARLSON, The Need for
Transparency in the Age of Predictive Sentencing Algorithms, in Iowa L. Rev. 2017, 303.
18
As to the mentioned epistemic issues see, e.g., BOYD, CRAWFORD, Critical questions for Big Data: provocations
for a cultural, technological, and scholarly phenomenon, in Information, Communication & Society 2012, 662;
GITELMAN (ed.), “Raw Data” is an Oxymoron 2013; SHAW, Big Data and Reality, in Big Data & Society 2015, 1;
SYMONS, ALVARADO, Can We Trust Big Data? Applying Philosophy of Science to Software, in Big Data &
Society 2016, 1; and MITTELSTADT, ALLO, TADDEO, WACHTER, FLORIDI, The ethics of algorithms: Mapping
the debate, in Big Data & Society 2016, 1.
19
As to the issues connected to information manipulation see, e.g., PASQUALE, Beyond Innovation and Competition:
The Need for Qualified Transparency in Internet Intermediaries, in NW. U. L. Rev. 2010, 105; VAIDHYANATHAN,
The Googlization of Everything (and Why We Should Worry) 2011; MANTELERO, Big Data: I Rischi della
17

4

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3363178

algorithms may lead to decisions that, once evaluated according to the existing laws, are unfair or
discriminatory against special classes of individuals.20
Against this array of concerns, transparency is often raised as the quintessential solution.21 The
key idea is that seeing the internals of an algorithm leads to comprehend its operations and
outcomes. In other words, transparent algorithms make the related decision-making processes be
accountable, that is, eligible to be fully scrutinized as so to prevent, detect, or eliminate possible
biases, forms of discrimination, or species of unfairness.
Nevertheless, not only some computer scientists doubt that algorithmic transparency will ever
provide effective clarity and accountability.22 Also, often algorithms born secret within the four
walls of companies. Firms are indeed interested in keeping them secret, because their use may
guarantee a significant competitive edge against their rivals. Finally – and more importantly from
a legal perspective – as the following section will show in relation to the EU jurisdiction,
algorithms may enjoy a legal protection that, because of its architecture of remedies, strengthens
this de facto secrecy.
4.

Algorithms can be protected as trade secrets

In general, the sequence of orders and commands of which an algorithm is composed can be
represented in different ways. One can use ordinary language to write it down on papers. Or, to
avoid verbosity and ambiguity, someone else may draw a flowchart, ie a diagram where the steps
of which the algorithm is made are represented via squared and round boxes connected by arrows.
And the algorithms that have to be executed by computers, such as decision-making algorithms,
must take the shape of computer programs: namely, they must be expressed via a specific
programming language that humans can read – the so-called “source code” – and via a machineConcentrazione del Potere Informativo Digitale e gli Strumenti di Controllo, in Il Diritto dell’informazione e
dell’informatica 2012, 135; PARISER, The Filter Bubble: How the New Personalized Web Is Changing What We
Read and How We Think 2012; CASATI, Contro il Colonialismo Digitale 2013; and HELBING, Societal, Economic,
Ethical and Legal Challenges of the Digital Revolution: From Big Data to Deep Learning, Artificial Intelligence, and
Manipulative Technologies 2015, https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/1504/1504.03751.pdf.
20
TENE, POLONETSKY, Big Data for All: Privacy and User Control in the Age of Analytics, in Northwestern
Journal of Technology and Intellectual Property 2013, 239; Newman, The Costs Of Lost Privacy: Consumer Harm
And Rising Economic Inequality In The Age Of Google, in William Mitchell Law Review 2014, 849; WHITE
HOUSE,
Big
Data:
Seizing
Opportunities,
Preserving
Values
2014,
https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/2016_0504_data_discrimination.pdf; FTC, Big Data.
A Tool for Inclusion or Exclusion? (2016) https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/reports/big-data-toolinclusion-or-exclusion-understanding-issues/160106big-data-rpt.pdf; and STRAUß, Big Data – Towards a new
Techno-Determinism?
2015,
https://sciforum.net/conference/isis-summit-vienna2015/paper/2919/download/pdf+&cd=4&hl=it&ct=clnk&gl=it.
21
See, e.g., SCHWARTZ, Data Processing and Government Administration: The Failure of the American Legal
Response to the Computer, in Hastings L.J. 1992, 1321; LEVINE, Secrecy and Accountability: Trade Secrets in Our
Public Infrastructure, in Fla. L. Rev. 2007, 135, 180; KEATS CITRON, Technological Due Process, in Wash. U. L.
Rev. 2008, 1249; MOORE, Trade Secrets and Algorithms as Barriers to Social Justice 2017,
https://cdt.org/files/2017/08/2017-07-31-Trade-Secret-Algorithms-as-Barriers-to-Social-Justice.pdf; PASQUALE,
The Black Box Society: The Secret Algorithms That Control Money And Information 2015, 34–35.
22
DESAI, KROLL, Trust But Verify: A Guide To Algorithms And The Law, in Harvard Journal Of Law &
Technology 2017, 1 where further references to computer science literature. Furthermore, see PEREL; ELKINKOREN, Black Box Tinkering: Beyond Disclosure in Algorithmic Enforcement, in Fla. L. Rev. 2017, 181,

5

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3363178

readable language – the so-called “object code” – that consists of strings of ones and zeros
according to the binary code.
However, when it comes to EU trade secret law, the way in which algorithms are represented and
fixed in physical supports ─ a way that, under the circumstances, may be relevant in relation to
patent or copyright protections ─ does not matter. Indeed, the unifying notion of trade secret as set
forth by Article 2 of the Directive refers only to information,23 which (i) is secret; (ii) has
commercial value due to its secrecy; and (iii) is subject to reasonable steps to keep it secret. In
other words, if a piece of information meets these three requirements, the vehicle whereby it has
been conveyed does not make any difference: to use the words of copyright lawyers, trade secrets
protection covers also “ideas” and not only expressions.24 Not by chance, while regulating the
unlawful acquisition of trade secrets, Article 4 relies on a very broad expression to indicate the
supports enshrining trade secrets: it refers to «any documents, objects, materials, substances or
electronic files containing the trade secret or from which the trade secret can be deduced».
Therefore, regardless their representation, algorithms can be protected as trade secrets, if they are
pieces of information that satisfy the above-mentioned requirements.
And indeed algorithms are pieces of secret information, whose economic value depends on their
secrecy, and that companies try to shelter by adopting reasonable measures.25
First, by tradition,26 the notion of trade secrets includes not only pieces of technical or commercial
knowledge, but also objects consisting in sequences of orders and instructions, such as
manufacturing processes, business methods and strategies, formulas and recipes, genetic materials,
fragrances, or chemical compounds.27 Furthermore, EU rules on trade secrecy expressly protect
know-how:28 the very same title of the Directive drives under the umbrella name of trade secrets
«undisclosed know-how». In several recitals, then, the Directive groups together know-how and
business information. For example, Recital 1 clarifies that the «valuable know-how and business
As to the objects that can be kept secret, the DTSA is more detailed. It states that, «the term “trade secret” means
all forms and types of financial, business, scientific, technical, economic, or engineering information, including
patterns, plans, compilations, program devices, formulas, designs, prototypes, methods, techniques, processes,
procedures, programs, or codes, whether tangible or intangible, and whether or how stored, compiled, or
memorialized physically, electronically, graphically, photographically, or in writing» (emphasis added). There are no
doubts, hence, that the algorithms of tech giants, which are US companies, can be protected under the Federal Trade
Secret Law of the United States.
24
GUGLIELMETTI, supra nt. 6, at 114 who makes this clarification to argue that trade secrets protection may
complement copyright protection that, indeed, covers expressions and not ideas.
25
NOTO LA DIEGA, Against the Dehumanisation of Decision-Making. Algorithmic Decisions at the Crossroads of
Intellectual Property, Data Protection, and Freedom of Information, in JIPITEC 2018, 3.
26
Article 2 is very similar to Article 39 TRIPS, which – turning to the Italian experience – has affected the wording
of Article 6-bis d. lgs. 1996/198 that, in turn, has been transposed into the current Article 98 c.p.i. Therefore, there is
room to argue that the interpretative solutions developed in relation to these provisions can hold true in relation to the
interpretation of Article 2. For the same opinion, see ARCIDIACONO, supra nt. 13, at 10; and BANTERLE, BLEI,
Alcune novità introdotte dalla Direttiva Trade Secrets, Dir. Ind. 2017, 208. In addition, as the wording of Article 39
was derived from the U.S. UTSA, the lines of reasoning developed in relation to the latter can become a significant
benchmarks for the former – see, in this regard, PIRES DE CARVALHO, The TRIPS Regime of Patents and Test
Data 2014, 541.
27
EUIPO, Protecting innovation through trade secrets and patents: determinants for European union firms, 2017, 1213.
28
SAPPA, What Does Trade Secrecy Have to Do with the Interconnection-based Paradigm of the Internet of Things?,
in EIPR 2018, 518, 521.
23

6

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3363178

information, that is undisclosed and intended to remain confidential, is referred to as a trade secret»
and Recital 3 affirms that, «trade secrets are one of the most commonly used forms of protection
of intellectual creation and innovative know-how by businesses». Thus, the notion of trade secrets
does cover pieces of information functional to production and distribution, such as the instructions
for the realization of a commodity, formulas or industrial procedures, drawings relating to
machinery for production or products, internal manuals, product specifications, as well as test and
test results.29 Hence, since algorithms command how to pursue a task, they can well be qualified
as pieces of know-how. In addition, the fact that the combinations of formulas of which algorithms
are made can be protected can be inferred also from Article 2(1)(a), which states that a trade secret
shall be ascertainable «as a body or in the precise configuration and assembly of its components».
Finally, as expressed in Recital 14, the notion of trade secret must be interpreted extensively,30
because, to spur innovation and guarantee the safe circulation of knowledge, legislators cannot
impose peculiar hurdles to prevent firms from making secret the results of their investments.31 In
other words, the object of the protection must be any resource that can be used for business
purposes and that is capable of providing competitive advantages to its holder. Therefore, as long
as the other three definitional elements are met, virtually any type of information can be a trade
secret.
For these reasons, hence, the idea that trade secret law should be the domain of semantics cannot
hold true for algorithms.32 According to this standpoint, which has been elaborated in relation to
digital data, trade secret law would not be meant to protect the strings of zeros and ones in which
those data are encoded. Neither, would it protect their syntactic representation, that is, the figures
and the sequences of strings through which digital data come to life. Rather, trade secret law should
protect the meaning and the content of those data, that is, the messages that they convey. However,
though this approach is reasonable in relation to digital data, there would no point in protecting
the meaning of algorithms, that is, the task that they pursue or the rationale underpinning them.
Algorithmic tasks and rationales already are pieces of common knowledge. For example,
everybody knows that PageRank is meant to rank websites and works by counting the number and
quality of links to a page to determine a rough estimate of how important the website is.
Differently, what only some Google’s employees know – often partially – is the exact sequence
and combination of orders and commands on which PageRank has been built upon. As a matter of
fact, indeed, when it comes to algorithms, companies want to protect also their syntax, the structure
of instructions of which they are made, because it is there that their economic value lays. Therefore,
an interpretation of EU Trade Secret Law meant to protect only semantics in lieu of syntax would

See, MANSANI, La nozione di segreto di cui all’art. 6-bis l.i., Dir. Ind. 2002, 216 and OTTOLIA, sub Artt. 98-99,
in UBERTAZZI, Commentario breve alle leggi sulla proprietà intellettuale e concorrenza, 2016, 535-536 (for a
detailed comparison with the other EU notion of know-how).
30
DESSEMONTET, Protection of Trade Secrets and Confidential Information 281, in Correa, Yusuf (eds) Intellectual
Property and International Trade. The TRIPS Agreement 2008; GERVAIS, The TRIPS Agreement: drafting history
and analysis 2008, 424; MYERS, Principles of Intellectual Property Law 2012, 363; PIRES DE CARVALHO, supra
nt. 26, at 225 («the notion of trade secrets, as far as their subject matter is concerned, must be accepted in the broadest
of terms»).
31
See, LIBERTINI, Le informazioni aziendali segrete come oggetto di diritti di proprietà intellettuale, in Riv. italiana
scienze giur. 2011, 149.
32
DREXL, Designing Competitive Markets for Industrial Data, in Journal of Intellectual Property, Information
Technology and Electronic Commerce Law 2016, 257, 269.
29

7

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3363178

negate protection to resources – algorithms – that are used for business purposes and are capable
of making firms gain significant competitive edges.
Second, as to the requirements set forth by Article 2, there is room to maintain that usually
algorithms are secret, have a value because secret, and are subjects to measures meant to keep
them secret. To be sure, this is a matter of fact that should be ascertained case by case.33 However,
the experience suggests that in the great majority of cases the formulas of which algorithms are
made are not generally known or readily accessible to professionals or to the public at large. For
example, algorithms are not reported in media, inscribed in public registers, or presented on trade
fairs, conventions, or other public events. In addition, as said above, algorithmic orders and
commands are not self-explanatory or self-revealing: they cannot be derived from the examination
of the pieces of information or of the personalized products and services that they contribute to
create.34 Even more importantly, when algorithms are made available to third parties,35 third
parties are bound to keep them secret and confidential.36 For example, as it happens with ordinary
pieces of software,37 firms may license the object-code of algorithms, keep secret their sourcecode – which consist in the algorithms themselves – and ban the reverse engineering (or
decompilation) of the object-code via a specific contractual clause.
Furthermore, algorithms have an economic value that would be nullified, had they been
disclosed.38 As seen above, in the digital economy, algorithms serve to give sense to (big) data and
to infer pieces information from them – pieces of information that, in turn, find manifold profitable
usages. For example, they can work to improve firms’ decision-making processes and strategies;
they can be employed to design customized products or services strengthening the bindings with
consumers; or they can be offered to the market as recommendations, search results, rankings, or
reviews. Thus, without neglecting the role of raw data, a good share of the competitive advantages
The same is true in the United States where, indeed, whether information qualifies as a “trade secret” under federal
or state law is determined by a jury who usually considers: (i) the extent to which the information is known outside of
the company; (ii) the value of the information to the company and to its competitors; and (ii) the measures taken by
the company to guard the secrecy of the information. See GAIDO, supra nt. 10, at 133.
34
Where information is readily ascertainable from a simple inspection of a product, such that little or no reverse
engineering is in fact needed, then the information will be “readily accessible” and not secret – See APLIN, A critical
evaluation of the proposed EU trade secrets directive (2014), http://ssrn.com/abstract=2467946
35
Indeed, according to many scholars the requirement of secrecy is a relative and not an absolute one. Absolute secrecy
would require that the secret be kept within the company, while relative secrecy allows companies to license out their
trade secrets. See, e.g., HULL, The licensing of trade secrets and know-how, in DE WERRA (ed), Research Handbook
on Intellectual Property Licensing 2013, 155 and ff.. Instead, there is a lively debate on the number of licenses allowed
not to undermine secrecy. See, e.g., PIRES DE CARVALHO, supra nt. 26, at 83 (arguing that secrecy remains as
long as the last competitor is kept apart from it) and MEITINGER, Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights, Cottier, Verón, Concise International and European IP Law (2011) 85 (maintaining that
secret information falls into the public domain when the number of licenses overcomes a given threshold).
36
This clarification as to the confidentiality clauses within licensing agreements is due to the third requirement: if an
individual discloses his trade secret to others who are under no obligation to protect the confidentiality of the
information, or otherwise publicly discloses the secret, his property right is extinguished. See DE WERRA, How to
Protect Trade Secrets in High-Tech Sports? An Intellectual Property Analysis Based on the Experiences at the
America's Cup and in the Formula One Championship, EIPR 2010, 155, 159.
37
GUGLIELMETTI, supra nt. 6, at 113.
38
As to the requirement of value, many scholars consider it a de minimis requirement addressing both potential and
actual value. See DESSEMONTET, supra nt. 30, at 281; and APLIN AND OTHERS, Gurry on Breach of Confidence
2012, 177, 193. Moreover, see Recital 14 referencing to potential and actual economic value. See, also,
ARCIDIACONO, supra nt. 13, at 11-12 and LEMLEY, supra nt. 6, at 338.
33

8

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3363178

that some data companies hold is due to their algorithms’ ability to analyze and elaborate data as
so to produce innovation. Not by chance, the supporters of the open data movement believe that
firms would keep on competing even in a world where all the raw data available were put in
common, just because any firm would still use its own algorithms and thus rely on them (and on
the added value that they produce) to overcome and defeat rivals.
Finally, nothing in theory prevents from thinking that firms controlling algorithms apply
measures,39 adequate according to the circumstances,40 to keep them secret, not only via
technological tools meant to strengthen the security of their IT systems against hackers’ attacks,
but also via legal tools, such as personal, territorial or technical restrictions of access to the
algorithms, clauses precluding reverse engineering, and secrecy clauses in corporate compliance
programs, employment contracts, and non-disclosure agreements with customers and users. In
other words, at present, nothing suggest that the secrecy bond regarding algorithms is not visible
to the outside as within the company organization and, hence, nothing support the idea that firms
at large do not use care in keeping algorithms confidential.
In summary, algorithms fall within the scope of Article 2 of the Trade Secret Directive and, as a
consequence, deserve to enjoy the legal protection afforded by the Directive.
5.

No algorithmic transparency by default

Article 4(1) of the Directive establishes that, «trade secret holders are entitled to apply for the
measures, procedures and remedies provided for in [the] Directive in order to prevent, or obtain
redress for, the unlawful acquisition, use or disclosure of their trade secret». In particular, it sets
the standard of protection – beyond which Member States may however go (Article 1) – by
distinguishing direct from indirect misappropriation and by listing the acts consisting in the
acquisition, use, and disclosure of trade secrets. Namely, in the case of direct misappropriation,
the acquisition, use, or disclosure of the trade secret involve two parties, the trade secret holder
and the infringer, and happens because the former does not authorize the latter to acquire, use, or
disclose the trade secret at stake (Article 4(2) and (3)). In the case of indirect misappropriation, the
parties involved are three (or more), the trade secret holder, the infringer, and the third parties, and
third parties are responsible of unlawful misappropriation if, at the time of the acquisition, use, or

39

For the rationale of this requirement, LEMLEY, supra nt. 6, at 136 (arguing that it stems «from traditional tort
notions of contributory negligence, under which plaintiffs were barred from relief it they themselves contributed to
the tort»). In other words, it is reasonable to require a minimum standard of care for one's own secret, as so to distribute
the costs of the protection also on the trade secret holder. Furthermore, this third requirement plays a role on the
evidentiary plan. See BONE, Trade secrecy, innovation and the requirement of reasonable secrecy precautions, in
DREYFUSS and STRANDBURG (eds) The Law and Theory of Trade Secrecy, 2011, 46.
40
Optimal security is not required. Rather, it is the idea of proportionality that must govern the scope of the adopted
defensive measures, because a company cannot be required to bear excessive costs to protect its secrets. See LANDES
and POSNER, The Economic Structure of Intellectual Property Law 2003, 369. Then, to assess proportionality many
circumstances may reveal, ranging from the size of the company to the importance of the information; from whether
there have been past instances of misappropriation to the field of business and its normal practices; from the number
and kind of employees to the use and number of passwords. See, in this regard, PIRES DE CARVALHO, supra nt.
26, at 237; HALLIGAN, WEYAND, The economic valuation of Trade Secret Assets, in Journal of Internet Law 2016,
19, 21.

9

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3363178

disclosure of the information at stake, they knew or ought to have known, under the circumstances,
that such trade secret had been obtained directly or indirectly from the infringer (Article 4(4)).41
In addition, as to the identification of the infringing practices, the Directive first considers those
resulting in the acquisition of trade secrets. Thus, it does not only refer to «unauthorized access to,
appropriation of, or copying of any documents, objects, materials, substances or electronic files,
lawfully under the control of the trade secret holder, containing the trade secret or from which the
trade secret can be deduced», but it also introduces a catch-all clause that targets «any other
conduct which, under the circumstances, is considered contrary to honest commercial practices»
(Article 4(2)). Next, the Directive provides for three cases of unauthorized use and disclosure of
trade secrets: when the infringer «[has] acquired the trade secret unlawfully; (b) [breaches] a
confidentiality agreement or any other duty not to disclose the trade secret; (c) [breaches] a
contractual or any other duty to limit the use of the trade secret».
Finally, Article 4(5) introduces the liability for the acts of misappropriation of customers and
suppliers. It holds liable those who knew or ought to have known that the goods they were
producing, storing, or bargaining, in national or international markets, were infringing goods, that
is, «goods, the design, characteristics, functioning, production process or marketing of which
significantly benefits from trade secrets unlawfully acquired, used or disclosed» (Articles 2(4)).
Thus, such a broad definition encompasses goods that contain or embody a trade secret, as well as
goods that were produced by a process that itself qualifies as a trade secret.
In summary, hence, to enable trade secrets holders to preserve their first-mover returns resulting
from their innovation-related efforts, Article 4 is meant to protect trade secrets from theft,
economic espionage, unauthorized publications, and any other dishonest conduct that, for example,
could entail a breach of contract, a breach of trust, or a form of incitement to undertake them.42
Even more importantly, under the circumstances, Art. 4 also covers the products and services
whose features and value depend on the acquisition, use, or disclosure of the trade secret.
Therefore, by turning to algorithms, it is likely that who will hacker the security systems of a
company to get access and copy its algorithms will be held responsible for trade secret
infringement. Likewise, a violation will occur if someone utilizes or reveals the combinations of
commands of which algorithms are made notwithstanding legal restrictions forbidding such a
behavior, such as the non-disclosure clauses included in confidentiality agreements or work
contracts, or such as the scope-limitation clauses included in licensing contract. And, because of
the provision on indirect misappropriation, whoever will knowingly take advantage from these
unfair practices, will be considered an infringer, even when its behavior will regard the outcomes
and results produced by algorithms.
However, although it may appear strict, the just-described minimum standard of protection
provided for by the Directive does not grant any absolute right to trade secrets holders,43 not even
41

Therefore, a third party who acts in good faith is not an infringer. See LIBERTINI, supra nt. 31, at 185 and
ARCIDIACONO, supra nt. 13, at 21-22.
42
See in this regard nt. 10, Art. 39, TRIPS Agreement that reads that, «For the purpose of this provision 'a manner
contrary to honest commercial practices' shall mean at least practices such as breach of contract, breach of confidence
and inducement to breach, and includes the acquisition of undisclosed information by third parties who know, or were
grossly negligent in failing to know, that such practices were involved in the acquisition».
43
See SAPPA, What Does Trade Secrecy Have to Do with the Interconnection-based Paradigm of the Internet of
Things?, in EIPR 2018 518, 520; BANTERLE, BLEI, supra nt. 26, at 202-203; SARTI, Informazioni aziendali

10

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3363178

to the companies controlling priceless algorithms. As the reference to «honest commercial
practices» suggests, the Directive has embraced the unfair competition paradigm: it does not
protect secret information in itself and it does not create a property regime. Rather, it establishes a
liability regime,44 or a quasi-property protection,45 which ceases to exist even when the information
is made publicly accessible via illegitimate means and which forbids “only” specific tortious
conduct.46 Indeed, in quite an iconic way, Article 3(1) of the Directive, which must be transposed
in each national law (Article 1), clarifies – among the others47 – that the holder of a trade secret
cannot prevent others from reaching out the same knowledge and information by way of
“independent discovery or creation”, “reverse engineering”,48 or «any other practice which, under
the circumstances, is in conformity with honest commercial practices». In other words, as Recital
16 clarifies,49 to avoid a form of overbroad protection of trade secrets,50 Article 3(1) indicates the
peculiar scenarios where others – probably, other entrepreneurs51 – by chance or acumen and by
behaving fairly, will arrive second in elaborating the same information covered by the trade secret.
Yet, clearly enough, Article 3(1) does not stand for the idea that algorithms should be transparent
by default. Article 3(1) does not address the case of a company obliged to disclose its trade secrets.
More, in considering independent innovations, reverse engineering, or honest commercial
practices, Article 3(1) does not mention any form of voluntary, much less compulsory,
segrete, Enc. Treccani 2014; PIRES DE CARVALHO, supra nt. 26, at 569. Also in the United States trade secret law
is protected against acts of unfair competition. See LEMLEY, supra nt. 6, at 311. Finally, on the Italian debate about
the nature of the trade secret protection see, DI CATALDO, Il nuovo codice della proprietà industriale, in Giur. comm.
2005, 574; FLORIDIA, Il riassetto della proprietà industriale 2006, 384; GHIDINI, FALCE, Upgrading Trade Secrets
as IPRs: a recent break through in Italian Ip Law, in Dir. aut. 2008, 119; GHIDINI, La tutela del segreto: critica di una
“riforma”, in Dir. ind. 2008, 169; VANZETTI, La tutela “corretta” delle informazioni segrete, in Riv. dir. ind. 2011,
4; CRESPI, sub Artt. 98-99 c.p.i., in VANZETTI, SIRONI, Codice della proprietà industriale 2013, 1104: OTTOLIA,
supra nt. 29, at 538-540.
44
See FALCE, Tecniche di protezione delle informazioni riservate. Dagli accordi TRIPS alla direttiva sul segreto
industriale, Riv. dir. ind., 132 and 136, who explains that, in the end, trade secrets protection grants to its holder an
advantage, which expires as soon as the information becomes accessible to the public.
45
REICHMAN, How trade secrecy law generates innovative know-how, in DREYFUSS, STRANDBURG (eds), The
law and theory of trade secrecy 2001, 185, 197.
46
GUGLIELMETTI, supra nt. 6, at 110.
47
To be sure, Article 3 regulates also employees’ behaviors. In this regard, see infra paragraph 6.2.
48
To be sure, the Directive explicitly allows trade secrets holders to impose contractual limitations on the freedom of
reverse engineering. Indeed, Recital 16 reads that, «[i]n the interest of innovation and to foster competition, the
provisions of this Directive should not create any exclusive right to know-how or information protected as trade
secrets. Thus, the independent discovery of the same know-how or information should remain possible. Reverse
engineering of a lawfully acquired product should be considered as a lawful means of acquiring information, except
when otherwise contractually agreed. The freedom to enter into such contractual arrangements can, however, be
limited by law» (emphasis added).
49
Namely, Recital 16 states that, «[i]n the interest of innovation and to foster competition, the provisions of this Directive
should not create any exclusive right to know-how or information protected as trade secrets».
50
MAGNANI, La tutela concorrenziale del segreto nella ricerca di un equilibrio tra interessi privati e collettivi:
fondamenti giuridici ed economici della protezione alla luce della direttiva 2016/943, mimeo (arguing for a balance
between the protection of secret information and the need to avoid such protection being too costly for the community).
For the discussion of the equilibrium between trade secrets and patent protections see GUGLIELMETTI, supra nt. 6,
at 109; and LIBERTINI, supra nt. 31, at 142 and ff..
51
Indeed, because of the kind of activities deemed lawful and because of their commercial nature, it is reasonable to
argue that, as a matter of fact, the ones who will benefit from Article 3(1) will be entrepreneurs: the direct competitors
of trade secret holders, their suppliers, or their customers.

11

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3363178

collaboration of trade secret holders in favor of the “second comers”. In other words, in light of
the interests in spurring innovation and knowledge dissemination, the protection of confidential
information against unlawful acquisition, use, or disclosure cannot be interpreted as an exceptional
reward granted to a particularly meritorious company. In market economies, this protection is one
of the many ordinary mechanisms aimed at discouraging opportunistic and parasitic behaviors.52
Rather, algorithmic transparency should be considered exceptional.
6.

When EU Trade Secret Law admits algorithmic transparency

Each rule allows concessions and some of the provisions included in Articles 1, 3, and 5 list cases
where trade secrets protection cannot be asserted. In particular, from the functional standpoint,
while Article 1 indicates what the Directive does not cover, say, its “negative scope”, Article 3
limits the broadness of trade secrets protection, and Article 5 focuses on preliminary questions
that, if verified as true, legitimize the dismissal of the causes brought for trade secrets
infringement.53 Furthermore, as to the issue that they govern, Articles 1(2)(b), 1(2)(c), 3(2), and
5(d) refer to the tension between trade secrets protection and the pursuit of public and legitimate
interests; Articles 1(2)(a) and 5(a) deal with the case of journalists struggling with trade secrets;
Article 5(b) regulates whistleblowing; and, finally, whereas Article 1(3) defines the boundaries of
trade secrets protection in relation to employees’ mobility, Articles 1(2)(d), 3(1)(c), and 5(c) focus
on how trade secrets protection could affect trade unions’ activities.
The subsequent paragraphs follow this last classification to understand whether the above
mentioned rules give some leeway to algorithmic transparency. Namely, paragraph 6.1 considers
the cases where pieces of Union or national law other from the Directive may impose algorithmic
transparency. Paragraph 6.2 analyzes the cases where journalists, whistleblowers, or employees
will be immunized from any responsibility arisen from having disclosed algorithms.54
6.1

The place to decide about algorithmic transparency lies outside the boundaries of the
Directive

Article 1(2)(b), backed-up in Recital 11, states that the Directive shall not affect «the application
of Union or national rules requiring trade secret holders to disclose, for reasons of public interest,
information, including trade secrets, to the public or to administrative or judicial authorities for the
performance of the duties of those authorities». Therefore, first this provision, which directly
addresses trade secrets holders, acknowledges that the protection of trade secrets is subordinated
to the protection of the public interest, when there are some pieces of European or national laws
requiring trade secrets holders disclose their knowledge and information. Second, it specifies that
such a disclosure may happen towards the public at large or towards administrative or judicial
authorities as so to guarantee the smooth working of the Union and national enforcing systems.
Thus, turning to the topic of this paper, had a piece of Union or national law imposed a general
obligation to disclose algorithms, their trade secret protection should take a step back. On the other
hand, absent such a piece of law governing algorithmic transparency for the protection of the public
interest, it is hard to charge trade secret holders with any disclosure obligation. At most, it could
52

LIBERTINI, supra nt. 31, at 157.
See Article 9 as to the rules governing trade secrets protection during infringing trials.
54
Differently, the analysis does not take into considerations the rules about employees.
53

12

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3363178

happen that, in some administrative proceedings or trials, trade secret holders will be required to
disclose algorithms as so to make the facts at stake ascertainable. Therefore, there is room to argue
that if someone will ever consider a secret algorithm responsible for an unlawful behavior, he/she
will be enabled to bring an (administrative or judicial) action against the trade secret holder to then
obtain that competent authorities be allowed scrutinizing the algorithm within the meaning of the
procedural rules at work under their national laws and Article 9 of the Directive. After all, while
investigating about the market position of Google Shopping, the EU Commission did look inside
Google’s algorithm and found out how it was manipulated to favor Google Shopping against other
comparison sites.55
In the same wake, Article 1(2)(c), addressed also in Recital 11, regulates the relationship between
trade secret holders and public bodies, whenever European or national. It prevents the Directive
from affecting «the application of Union or national rules requiring or allowing Union institutions
and bodies or national public authorities to disclose information submitted by businesses which
those institutions, bodies or authorities hold pursuant to, and in compliance with, the obligations
and prerogatives set out in Union or national law». Thus, the scenario here depicted is that of a
public body that gets to hold some pieces of confidential information due to its duties and rights
and, subsequently, either is obliged by the law to disclose them, or opt for such a behavior.
Now, it seems quite clear that in the first hypothesis – that of the compulsory disclosure cast upon
the public body – the Directive again affirms the idea that trade secrets protection must take a step
back, when a piece of law requires specific information to be disclosed. Arguably, in this case, the
Directive assumes that, if those pieces of laws exist, they protect interests that are superior to the
ones justifying trade secret protection.56 From this standpoint, hence, Articles 1(2)(b) and 1(2)(c)
do not differ significantly one from another: they both address the case of legal disclosure, but the
former refers to the case where the ones charged with this obligation are trade secret holders, while
the latter refers to the case where it is up to public bodies comply with the duty to disclose imposed
by the law. More importantly, both Articles 1(2)(b) and 1(2)(c) make disclosure of trade secrets a
matter of other pieces of law and, in so doing, they give room to possible conflicts, or at least to
case of vagueness, whose solutions will be set forth by rules other than EU Trade Secret law.57
55

Google Search, 27 June 2017, http://ec.europa.eu/competition/antitrust/cases/dec_docs/39740/39740_14996_3.pdf.
As a way of example, Recital 11 mentions the rules governing public access to documents, the provisions regulating
the transparency obligations of national public authorities, and some specific rules such as Regulation (EC) No
1049/2001 regarding public access to the documents of the Union institutions, Regulation (EC) No 1367/2006
implementing the Aarhus Convention about environmental information, and the connected Directive 2003/4/EC on
public access to environmental information. See Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001 of the European Parliament and of
the Council of 30 May 2001 regarding public access to European Parliament, Council and Commission documents
(OJ
L
145,
31.5.2001,
p.
43);
Aarhus
Convention
http://www.unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/env/pp/documents/cep43e.pdf, Regulation (EC) No 1367/2006 of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 6 September 2006 on the application of the provisions of the Aarhus
Convention on Access to Information, Public Participation in Decision-making and Access to Justice in Environmental
Matters to Community institutions and bodies (OJ L 264, 25.9.2006, p. 13), and Directive 2003/4/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 28 January 2003 on public access to environmental information and repealing Council
Directive 90/313/EEC (OJ L 41, 14.2.2003, p. 26).
57
For instance, Recital 18 of the very same Directive states that, public authorities are not released from the
confidentiality obligations included in Directive 2014/23/EU about concession contracts, Directive 2014/24/EU on
public procurement, and Directive 2014/25/EU about procurement by entities operating in the water, energy, transport
and postal services sectors. See Directive 2014/23/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February
2014 on the award of concession contracts (OJ L 94, 28.3.2014, p. 1); Directive 2014/24/EU of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2014 on public procurement and repealing Directive 2004/18/EC (OJ L
56

13

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3363178

Also the second hypothesis envisaged by Article 1(2)(c) drives to this conclusion about the
relevance of pieces of law other from the Directive. Art. 1(2)(c) governs the case of public bodies
allowed to disclose trade secrets and that choose to do it. However, the Directive does not provide
any criteria according to which public bodies should take such a decision. Therefore, either some
other rules fix them, or – arguably – public bodies would have to weigh the public interest in
disclosing trade secrets58 against the economic loss the disclosure would cause, ranging from
perspective costly court proceedings, heavy financial penalties, and damages. Therefore, it could
be that, absent clear criteria and parameters, public authorities would be very cautious before
deciding to walk that way. In other words, and turning to algorithmic transparency, Article 1(2)(c)
suggests that, whereas secret algorithms will be disclosed by public bodies when a piece of Union
or national law will oblige them to do it, the very same algorithms will probably remain secret if
public authorities will be free to choose whether to reveal them or not.
Finally, as perfect complements of Articles 1(2)(b) and 1(2)(c), two other provisions matter:
Article 3(2) and Article 5(d). The former states that, «[t]he acquisition, use or disclosure of a trade
secret shall be considered lawful to the extent that such acquisition, use or disclosure is required
or allowed by Union or national law». The latter reads that, «Member States shall ensure that an
application for the measures, procedures and remedies provided for in [the] Directive is dismissed
where the alleged acquisition, use or disclosure of the trade secret was carried out … for the
purpose of protecting a legitimate interest recognized by Union or national law». In other words,
whereas Article 3(2) drives the legally mandatory acquisition, use, or disclosure of trade secrets
outside the scope of the protection, Article 5(d) recognizes to individuals acting in compliance
with a law a good cause of defense to be used in courts. Both of them, however, converge in
remitting the decision about the legitimacy of the act of disclosing the secret to other pieces of law.
Therefore, for what matters most here, taken as a whole, the above provisions clarify that the place
in which to take a decision about algorithmic transparency and the many conflicting interests
underpinning it falls outside the limits of the EU law on trade secrets. Such a decision could be up
to an Union or a National law charging either trade secret holders or public bodies with the
obligation to disclose the algorithm; or this decision could be delegated to a judge called to
establish whether a public body or an individual disclosing an algorithm acted in the pursuit of
public interest or a legitimate interest recognized by the law. Hence, though silent on the general
need to impose algorithmic transparency, the Directive creates a microsystem of maximum
harmonization standards»59 indicating the case where trade secrets protection will not exist or take
a step back, due to the existence of relevant public interests, legally recognized or embraced by
public authorities.

94, 28.3.2014, p. 65); Directive 2014/25/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2014 on
procurement by entities operating in the water, energy, transport and postal services sectors and repealing Directive
2004/17/EC (OJ L 94, 28.3.2014, p. 243).
58
ARCIDIACONO, supra nt. 13, at 16, (nt 48) (arguing that the acquisition, use, or disclosure of trade secrets is
permitted only if – and to the extent that – it is functional to the pursuit of preeminent public interests in light of
national or Community legislation.
59
Ibidem, at 17.

14

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3363178

6.2

Algorithmic transparency resulting from the activities of some individuals

The Directive establishes that, in cases of conflict with the protection of trade secrets, the freedom
of expression and information rights, whistleblowing activity, or workers’ rights to move and to
be collectively represented shall prevail. In other words, the Directive recognizes that trade secrets
protection must not exist or take a step back, if this “retreat” favors the dissemination of facts, the
discovery and punishment of administrative or criminal irregularities, or workers’ freedom to
choose where to work and how to be represented effectively.
Namely, not to undermine investigative journalism and to guarantee the protection of journalistic
sources, Recital 19 and Article 1(2)(a) state that the trade Secret Directive cannot affect the
exercise of Article 11 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, that is, of the
right to freedom of expression and information, which encompasses also media freedom and
pluralism. Now, it is common knowledge that a Directive cannot rule out the application of a
fundamental right. Rather, what the Directive could have done and does not do is listing the criteria
under which, in any specific case, judges should balance this human right against the right of
businesses to the confidentiality of their commercially sensitive information. Anyway, in addition
to Article 1(2)(a), Article 5(a) confirms that Member States shall ensure that an action for trade
secrets infringement will be dismissed when the alleged acquisition, use, or disclosure of the trade
secret at stake is carried out «for exercising the right to freedom of expression and information as
set out in the Charter, including respect for the freedom and pluralism of the media». To be sure,
this provision, which transposes on the procedural level the content of Article 1(2)(a),60 could not
directly protect journalistic sources. The last, however, could find equivalent immunity by
invoking the application of Article 5(b), that is, by arguing that they are whistleblowers.
Indeed, backed-up by Recital 20, Article 5(b) reads that the protection of trade secrets should not
extend to cases in which trade secrets disclosure serves the public interest, insofar as directly
relevant «misconduct, wrongdoing or illegal activity» is revealed. Indeed, whistleblowers
denounce these behaviors, either by using internal reporting mechanisms set up by the institution
for which they work, or, when these are neither sufficient nor safe, by taking the risks to reveal
confidential information to the public, sometimes via the press. Given the veil of secrecy under
which many corporate activities occur, whistleblowers are sometimes the only available sources
on corporate misconduct, wrongdoing, or illegal activity.
Finally, the third kind of individual activities that push trade secrets protection back regards
workers. To protect the freedom to choose an occupation and right to engage in work, that is, the
freedom of establishment as provided for in Union law, Article 1(3) states that EU trade secret law
cannot offer any ground for limiting employees’ mobility. Therefore, the employees working at a
new employer may use, beyond information that is not a trade secret, their experiences and skills
as long as they have been honestly acquired within the meaning of Article 4(2) of the Directive
and in the normal course of their previous employment. Next, to allow workers to freely depict
their job conditions to their representatives, the Directive cannot affect their right to enter into
collective agreements (Articles 1(2)(d)). Therefore, not only shall the acquisition of a trade secret
be considered lawful when workers or their representatives exercise the rights to information and
consultation (Article 3(1)(c)). Also, Member States shall ensure that trade secrets infringement
action are dismissed where the alleged disclosure is made by workers to their representatives to
60

In the cases Article 5 lists, the claims for trade secrets infringement must be dismissed irrespective of whether the
trade secrets exist.

15

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3363178

the extent that is necessary to enable representative to carry out their legitimate functions (Article
5(c)). Last, any liability for damage caused to employers for acts of unlawful acquisition, use or
disclosure of their trade secrets by employees can be limited by Member States in circumstances
where the latter have acted without intent, cf. Article 14 (1) Directive.
In summary, and for what is more important here, the Directive makes specific individual practices
create a space for algorithmic transparency. The latter may indeed result from the activities of
journalists, whistleblowers, or employees, who all exercise rights, ranging from the right to
information to the right of establishment, that the very same Directive considers, under
circumstances, superior to the business interests to protect trade secrets.
9.

Concluding remarks

The EU Directive on trade secrets does not directly impose any form of algorithmic transparency.
After all, the Directive was born with the specific aim of sheltering secrets from misappropriation,
espionage, theft or any other species of unfair behavior. Thus, one cannot expect the Directive to
explicitly regulate the cases in which secrets must be disclosed and algorithms must be made
transparent.
Nevertheless, the Directive recognizes the existence of cases in which the above-described
commercial interests can give way to the protection of other values. Better, it identifies two macroscenarios: that of laws which, for the pursuit of public interest, impose the disclosure of secrets on
public authorities or on the very same trade secrets holders; and that of individuals who disclose
trade secrets in carrying out certain specific activities, all of which are aimed at the protection of
rights that are deemed superior, such as the right to information, the right to union representation,
and the right to have wrongdoings detected.
As a consequence, if a piece of Union or national law imposed algorithmic transparency to increase
algorithmic accountability, the Directive could not be invoked to protect the secrecy of the
algorithms. Equally, if journalists, whistleblowers, or workers revealed the sequence of orders of
which algorithms are made under the circumstances set forth by Article 5 of the Directive,
companies could not bring an infringement action successfully.
On closer inspection, though, these circumstances will have to be detailed by national judges.
Thus, in the absence of a case law on the matter, it is not possible to establish how likely the
behaviors of journalists, whistleblowers, and workers will be truly immunized from trade secrets
liability. More importantly, for the time being, the burden of deciding on what conditions the
algorithms should be made transparent and, therefore, accountable for the decisions they supported
or made remains with the national legal orders.

16

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3363178

