Evolutionary Fuzzy Systems
for Explainable Artificial
Tel rete ee AT
Em Cd me emt a Coes

 

 

i)
oa
nN
N

= 7

2014
a
ai s © Y
Bw

1995 sa = un 2010 6
as a =

y=

LY

~0)
® ——

 

 

 

IMAGE LICENSED BY INGRAM PUBLISHING FOR ING IMAGES.

Alberto Fernandez, Francisco Herrera, and Oscar Cordon
DaSClI Andalusian Institute of Data Science and Computational Intelligence,
University of Granada, Granada, SPAIN

Maria Jose del Jesus
DaSClI Andalusian Institute of Data Science and Computational Intelligence,
Department of Computer Science, University of Jaen, Jaen, SPAIN

Francesco Marcelloni

Department of Information Engineering, University of Pisa, Pisa, ITALY

t Identifier 10.1109/MCL 2018.2.
Date of publication: 10 January 2019

1556-603X/19©2019TEEE FEBRUARY 2019 | IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE 69

 

rized licensed use limited to: Universidad de Jaen. Downloaded on May 12,2021 at 10:47:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
“

Abstract—Evolutionary fuzzy systems are one of the great-
est advances within the area of computational intelligence.
They consist of evolutionary algorithms applied to the
design of fuzzy systems. Thanks to this hybridization,
superb abilities are provided to fuzzy modeling in many
different data science scenarios. This contribution is intend-
ed to comprise a position paper developing a comprehen-
sive analysis of the evolutionary fuzzy systems research field.
To this end, the “4 W” questions are posed and addressed
with the aim of understanding the current context of this
topic and its significance. Specifically, it will be pointed out
why evolutionary fuzzy systems are important from an
explainable point of view, when they began, what they are
used for, and where the attention of researchers should be
directed to in the near future in this area. They must play
an important role for the emerging area of eXplainable
Artificial Intelligence (XAI) learning from data.

I. Why Evolutionary Fuzzy Systems?
nowledge itself is power” [1]. This simple sentence has
led to a wave of continuous interest in developing
models that are able to extract the maximum
amount of information from data. In this context, the
use of machine learning (ML) techniques allows stakeholders to
obtain useful insights, predictions, and decisions from datasets of
many different sources in an automatic fashion [2]. Current
applications come with novel data characteristics as big dimen-
sion and non-standard classification problems, and both research-
ers and practitioners actually aim to understand how the models
work. Therefore, a movement is being witnessed from traditional
data mining towards a more profitable and challenging scenario
known as data science [3]. It brings novel technologies, frame-
works, methodologies, and skills that are designed to ease the
management of the challenges related to big data applications [4].

Nevertheless, to be able to reach the deepest level when
considering all the information available, the knowledge domain
and the data analysis must have a strong synergy. From a data
viewpoint, one must be aware of the quality associated with it.
Additionally, representation of the expert knowledge available
on the tackled application domain must also be considered.

In this scenario, fuzzy set theory might be regarded as a valu-
able tool. Proposed by Lofti A. Zadeh in the mid 60s [5], a lin-
guistic representation of numerical variables is possible by means
of a membership degree being assigned to each of them, which
could vary from 0 (full non-membership) to 1 (full member-
ship). Therefore, models that use fuzzy sets as a tool for data han-
dling provide some important advantages. In terms of semantics,
the use of linguistic labels in the fuzzy model structure is a natu-
ral knowledge representation allowing for a direct human inter-
action [6]. In addition, from a learning perspective, translating the
input features into fuzzy variables with fuzzy membership func-
tions permits obtaining smoothed descriptive models that adapt

well to data with a certain degree of uncertainty.

 

Corresponding Author: Alberto Fernandez (Email: alberto@decsai.ugr.es)

7O IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE | FEBRUARY 2019

Based on the former observations, and without lacking gen-
erality, the focus of this contribution will be set on fuzzy rule-
based systems (FRBSs) [7]. As their name suggests, FRBSs are
composed of fuzzy IF-THEN rules where both antecedents
and consequents usually contain fuzzy sets. The main compo-
nents of any FRBS are the knowledge base (KB) and the infer-
ence engine module. The KB comprises all the fuzzy rules
within a rule base (RB), and the definition of the fuzzy sets in
the data base (DB).The inference engine includes a fuzzification
interface, an inference system, and a defuzzification interface.

The learning procedure for FRBSs involves a search for the
model that, based on the observations, best approximates a
given performance metric [2]. In particular, finding the best
approach is related to the so-called “empirical risk—loss” func-
tion, which depends on the data the user works with. In other
words, any learning algorithm has the ultimate goal of optimiz-
ing a mapping function between inputs and outputs. In this
sense, the clear advantages of evolutionary algorithms (EAs) [8]
for developing this task must be highlighted.

EAs are a type of metaheuristic based optimization tech-
niques that are based on a population of solutions. As the name
suggests, EAs are concerned with biological evolution, so that
each solution is encoded as an individual of the population.
The search for the optimal values of the function that is being
optimized (the fitness value) is carried out by means of the
repeated application of operators such as reproduction, muta-
tion, recombination and selection. Among the different imple-
mentations of EAs, the most popular is certainly Genetic
Algorithms (GAs) [9], where solutions (also known as chromo-
somes) are encoded into strings of “genes”, and evolve by
means of recombination and/or mutation. EAs are not specifi-
cally designed as ML techniques. However, it is well-known
that a learning task can be modeled as an optimization problem
and thus effectively solved through evolution. EAs’ powerful
search in complex, ill-defined problem spaces has allowed for
them to be successfully applied to a huge variety of ML and
knowledge discovery tasks [10]. When the accuracy perfor-
mance is set as the fitness function of this optimization process,
the predictive quality of the system is expected to be boosted.

Considering the issues on predictive performance, the main
goal traditionally pursued is to make the model matching reality,
Le. effectively summarizing the underlying data. Hence, this
“quest for accuracy” is the most important requirement when
selecting a solution, and has probably supported the current
explosion of black-box ML approaches. This type of system is
known for having an excellent ability to learn accurately from
the input data. On the contrary, most of these accurate models
are highly non-transparent, i.e. it is no clear what information in
the input data makes them arrive at their decisions [11], [12].
Nowadays, there is an important need for safety, ethics, and sci-
entific understanding systems that provide the right to an expla-
nation where necessary [13]. They must be optimized not only
for accuracy but also for other criteria as fairness or unbiased-
ness, privacy, reliability, robustness, causality and/or trust, among

others. Most of these criteria often cannot be completely

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidad de Jaen. Downloaded on May 12,2021 at 10:47:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 

quantified, but if the system is interpretable,

Le. if it can explain its reasoning, it can be

verified whether that reasoning is sound with

respect to these auxiliary criteria.

There is little consensus on the definition of
interpretability, explainability and some of the
auxiliary criteria. In the ML context, the inter-
pretability is defined as the ability to explain or
to present in understandable terms to a human
[14]. In recent years a broader concept known as
explainability has emerged in what has been
denoted as eXplanaible Artificial Intelli-
gence (XAJ). It encompasses ML/AI systems for opening black
box models, for improving the understanding of what the models
have learned and/or for explaining individual predictions [11].

The design of this kind of systems includes different aspects
to be taken into account:

QO) Designers and developers must have the chance of analyzing
the generated model and discerning its meaning. i.e. to
understand the structure of the system.

QO) End-users must use the system as a decision support, so that
the model must explain the phenomena under study.
Interpretability is probably the traditional buzzword, in

the context of ML, and explainability in the broader context

of AI (XAI). Both with equivalent meaning and behind the
desideratum for accomplishing all the former issues. However,
different sub-concepts can be distinguished associated with
terms “interpretability” and “explainability”. Among others, we
should refer to “understandability”, “intelligibility” or “compre-

hensibility” [12], [15].

QO) Understandability and intelligibility can be viewed as
synonyms that are associated to a functional understanding of
the model in ML. In other words, it refers to grasp how the
model works [16], without trying to elucidate its inner proce-
dure or to shed light on its internal representation [17]. For
FRBSs, intelligibility is primarily associated with inference.

QO) Comprehensibility was defined as the learning algo-
rithm ability for encoding its model in such a way that it
may be inspected and understood by humans [15], [18].
This definition narrows the focus to the model itself. It is
based on the comprehensibility postulate argued by
Michalski [19]: “The results of computer induction should be
symbolic descriptions of given entities, semantically and structural-
ly similar to those a human expert might produce observing the
same entities. Components of these descriptions should be compre-
hensible as single ‘chunks’ of information, directly interpretable in
natural language, and should relate quantitative and qualitative
concepts in an integrated fashion”. In the FRBS context, the
comprehensibility is related with the fuzzy rules, and in
general with the KB.

The final objective related to explainability is boosting the
transparency in the solutions proposed for data science applica-
tions, and therefore the ability to trust the system output [20].

One straightforward way for combining two of the most

important concepts in ML (accuracy and interpretability/

One straightforward way for combining two of
the most important concepts in Machine Learning
(accuracy and interpretability/explainability) in

a natural way, to obtaining eXplainable Artificial
Intelligence models, is by means of the synergy
between Fuzzy Rule-Based Systems and
Evolutionary Algorithms.

explainability) in a natural way, to obtaining XAI models, is by
means of the synergy between FRBSs and EAs. Specifically, the
intrinsic understandability, comprehensibility, and explainability
associated with FRBSs, and the potential of EAs as the optimi-
zation technique for improving FRBSs, leads to what is known
as evolutionary fuzzy systems (EFSs) [21].

In short, an EPS is a methodology that utilizes EAs for a
“fine-setting” of the components of the FRBS, with the aim of
achieving a more reliable solution in terms of any desired
objective function, based on accuracy, interpretability, or a
combination of both.The EA may be applied a priori during
the building stage of the FRBS, leading to a “learning” stage, or
rather to be considered a posteriori for a finer adjustment of
the FRBS, which is known as a “tuning” stage. Different per-
spectives for the application of both approaches may be found
in the specialized literature.To set up the fuzzy sets, the param-
eterization of the fuzzy membership functions, and the selec-
tion of the fuzzy rules, among others, should be noted. In
addition, a very interesting extension uses multi-objective evo-
lutionary algorithms (MOEAs) [22], which can consider several
design criteria to be optimized concurrently, thus composing
the so-called multi-objective evolutionary fuzzy systems
(MOEFSs) [23].

In this contribution, a better insight on the topic of EFS is
provided by posing the 4 W questions. The first one has been
addressed throughout this section, namely Why are EFSs so
significant in data science tasks? The main reason has been
discussed above: they have a great potential for obtaining a
good trade-off between accurate and explainable models,
which is extremely important in most of the current social and
engineering applications.

The remaining 3 W questions are analyzed in depth to set
the past, present and future scenarios. Whereas the historical
review (past and present) is intended to set the current context
of EFSs, the main novelty in this position paper is related to
future insights. Specifically, special attention is paid to analyze
the capabilities of EFSs, in particular those areas that could
benefit the most from their application. Additionally, some
novel scenarios, namely data science, big data and the develop-
ment of explainable models, that EPS researchers should focus
on for the near future are described. Finally, the paper is con-
cluded by a thorough discussion on the need for XAI models
in ML, which is intended to go beyond the old-fashioned

FEBRUARY 2019 | IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE 71

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidad de Jaen. Downloaded on May 12,2021 at 10:47:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
dialectical exercise on the interpretability-accuracy trade-off,
very extended in FRBSs.

To carry out these tasks, the remainder of this paper is orga-
nized as follows. First, Section II considers When did EFSs
begin?, introducing the pioneer works on the topic and the
current taxonomy for EFSs. Section II analyzes What should
EFSs be used for?, presenting the good capabilities of EPSs,
namely robustness and explainability, for solving current prob-
lems and applications. Section IV is devoted to establishing
Where are EFSs going to?, considering some challenges for
future work, and focusing in particular on the big data scenario
due to its significance for current research. To summarize all
thoughts considered in this position paper, Section V presents
an overview of the need for XAI. Finally, Section VI points out
some concluding remarks.

Il. When Did Evolutionary Fuzzy Systems Begin?

Past and Present

In order to understand the present and to be able to forecast
the future of a specific topic, the history and state of the art
must be acknowledged. In this regard, this section highlights
the main progresses made in EPSs from their proposal to pres-
ent. To this aim, the initial milestones on the topic and some
well-known reviews are first introduced (Section I-A). Then, a
complete taxonomy is presented to frame the EFS techniques

in their different categories (Section II-B).

A. EFSs: Pioneering Approaches

The pioneering work by Lofti A. Zadeh on fuzzy sets supposed
a significant contribution in many research areas of control and
modeling [5]. Specifically, the application of fuzzy set theory as
a knowledge representation structure based on fuzzy rules
began in the mid-1970s with the work of Mamdani [7]. Practi-
cally at the same time, the basis and theoretical studies on EAs
were established, in particular regarding one of its branches, that
of GAs [9]. Despite the early appearance of both approaches,
only in the early 1990s the hybridization between these two
computational intelligence techniques was introduced.

Throughout this section, four of the pioneering works in
the field are discussed in no particular order. They adopted
both tuning and learning methodologies of the components of
the FRBS KB by means of GAs.

Karr was the first to investigate the genetic tuning of the
DB for fuzzy controllers [24]. In his study, the complete defini-
tion of the DB was intended to be optimized, i.e. the best val-
ues of the parameters that define the fuzzy partitions were
automatically determined. This was obtained thanks to the ease
of encoding information on the GA chromosome. In particu-
lar, the evolution of the input and output fuzzy sets was joint-
ly considered.

One of the first models of evolutionary learning of a lin-
guistic RB was proposed by Valenzuela~-Rendon in [25]. This
proposal used a learning scheme where each solution (chromo-
some) represented a single rule over the entire RB. The first

version of the methodology used a reward distribution scheme.

72° IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE | FEBRUARY 2019

Later, the original proposal was extended to allow reinforce-
ment learning.

A different scheme for learning the RB was defined by
Thrift in [26]. The author used a decision matrix to represent
the RB, in that particular case study only with two dimen-
sions. This matrix collected the linguistic labels of the output
variable according to the corresponding input fuzzy labels. It
considered an integer coding scheme, using “0” to represent a
null value, thus allowing for the automatic learning of the
optimal number of rules. The GA encoded different fuzzy
tules, i.e. the whole RB definition, on a single chromosome.

Pham and Karaboga proposed a similar approach but using a
fuzzy relation R instead of the classical crisp relation (decision
table) [27]. The GA was used to modify the fuzzy relational
matrix of a single-input/single-output fuzzy model. The chro-
mosome was obtained by concatenating the M:N elements of
R, where M and N were the number of linguistic terms asso-
ciated with the input and output variables, respectively. The
main difference with the work in [26] is that the elements of R
were real numbers in [0, 1] instead of integer values.

All these contributions were considered as milestones for the
work on EFSs. From that point on, the interest of researchers on
the topic has significantly increased. As a short description of
developments throughout the history of EPSs, four surveys are
considered. Ten years after the publication of the first approach-
es, the main achievements in the field were compiled in the
2001 monograph by Cordon, Herrera, Hoffmann, and Magda-
lena [21]. After a period of another ten years, Cordén proposed
a historical review focusing on the interpretability viewpoint in
2011 [28]. In 2013, Fazzolari, Alcala, Nojima, Ishibuchi, and
Herrera published an overview focused on the MOEFSs topic,
which was intended to summarize the main contributions in
this particular field [23]. Finally, in 2015 Fernandez, Lopez, del
Jesus, and Herrera revisited the topic of EPSs by presenting a
complete taxonomy of the existing proposals, and also posing
some new trends and challenges to suggest some potential

research directions [29].

B, EFSs: Current Taxonomy

As previously explained at the beginning of this paper, any EFS
is developed on top of an FRBS. In this way, the components of
the FRBS are learned or optimized using an evolutionary pro-
cess commonly taken from available data, as illustrated in Fig-
ure 1.The final goal is being able to contextualize the behavior
of these systems in a given scenario.

The main reason for using EAs as a tool for the design of
FRBSs is related to the possibility of addressing the optimiza-
tion of their components as a search problem. Rule sets, mem-
bership functions, and many other features of an FRBS can be
easily encoded inside a chromosome. The optimization proce-
dure can be viewed from a double perspective: learning and/or
tuning. In addition, the classical trade-off between accuracy and
interpretability must be taken into account [30], [31]. For this
task, the use of an MOEA is probably the option that is best
suited. Finally, different ways of representing fuzzy sets may be

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidad de Jaen. Downloaded on May 12,2021 at 10:47:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
considered as another aspect to be embedded in the optimiza-
tion approach.

Taking all these aspects into account, in [29] authors pro-
posed a complete taxonomy of EFSs, which is illustrated in
Figure 2. Specifically, three large groups were highlighted
depending on several aspects, such as how the FRBSs’ elements
are optimized, the trade-off among the different learning crite-
ria, and the use of new fuzzy set representations.

In what follows, a brief description of the EFS approaches
enumerated in the taxonomy is provided. First, the learning
and tuning of FRBSs are introduced. Next, the use of multi-
objective optimization in this framework is presented. Finally,
several comments are given on the parameterized construction

for new fuzzy representations.

1) Evolutionary Learning and Tuning

of FRBSs’ Components

When using an FRBS for modeling a given problem, researchers
and practitioners must decide whether a simple system is enough
for the existing requirements, or if a more complex computa-
tional solution is required. In such a case, the use of an EFS is

mandatory in order to achieve a robust and accurate model.

There are two main alternatives for developing EFSs: (a)
using EAs in the learning procedure of FRBSs and (b) using
EAs for tuning the elements of FRBSs. Specifically, learning
can be carried out either on the KB components or in con-
junction with the inference engine parameters. The post-pro-
cessing tuning is devoted to refining a preliminary definition of
the FRBSs. In the following, a short description of the different
approaches for both alternatives is provided.

a) Evolutionary learning. The specialized literature distin-
guishes between two main cases, depending on whether
the learning is applied just to the KB or to the inference
engine parameters as well.

QO) Evolutionary KB learning. Four different learning

options have been proposed to obtain the KB:

i) Evolutionary rule selection. The goal is to remove
useless rules in the final RB, i.e. those that may degrade
the FRBS accuracy. Thus, a compact and accurate
subset of fuzzy rules is intended to be the output for
these methods.

ii) Simultaneous evolutionary learning of KB com-

EB:

ponents. As its name suggests, several FRBS ele-

ments may be obtained at once. The hitch in this case

 

  

“Ry: If Xp is
6 Ayy and Xpp
} iS Ayo then Y |. . _—
< is By

Rule oe "

 

E>

Fuzzy Set
Numerical Data

   

Fuzzyfication
(Input Interface)

    
    
 
         
 

Data Base

™ a |

  
 

SW sie cia10|
Learning Process

  
 
 
  

_

 
         
    
   
  

Fuzzy Set
Numerical Data

 

 

 

 

FIGURE I How EFSs are built on top of an FRBS. Inspired from [29].

FEBRUARY 2019 | IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE 73

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidad de Jaen. Downloaded on May 12,2021 at 10:47:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 

   

Nol UL Cevarcl ay

Fuzzy Systems

 

  

 

Evolutionary Learning/ Fava
Tuning of FRBS ee
Components (via Single-
Objective or (via MOEFS)

  

 

Evolutionary
Learning of KB
Components and
Inference Engine
Parameters

Evolutionary|

Evolutionary
KB Learning Tuning

—~__
Versus

  

Performance
Versus

Performance
Interpretability

(Control Problems)

 

 

    

Evolutionary |] Simultaneous
Rule Selection] | Evolutionary
(a Priori Rule | Learning of KB

Extraction) |} Components

Evolutionary
Rule Learning
(a Priori DB)

  
   
   
   
   

Evolutionary
DB Learning

     
         

Evolutionary
Adaptive

Evolutionary
Tuning of
KB Parameters] |!nference Engine

 

    
     

Evolutionary
Learning of
Approximative/
TSK-Rules

Evolutionary
Learning of
Linguistic
Models

Embedded
Evolutionary

 
 

DB Learning

 

NS

A Priori
Evolutionary
DB Learning

 

   

   
  
  
  

Evolutionary
Adaptive

Defuzzification

Methods

   
 

Evolutionary
Adaptive
Inference

System

   
  
 

 

 

FIGURE 2 Evolutionary Fuzzy Systems Taxonomy. First presented in Fernandez et al. [29].

is that a larger search space is to be considered, imply-
ing a slower and harder learning process.

iti) Evolutionary rule learning. This is by far the pre-
ferred approach in the specialized literature. Starting from
a predefined DB (in most cases, composed of equally dis-
tributed fuzzy partitions), the fuzzy rules of the RB are
generated by means of the evolutionary process.

iv) Evolutionary DB learning. In this case, several
parameters of the DB are considered. This includes
the granularity degree, the shape of the membership
functions, and the scaling functions, among other DB
components. This DB learning can be carried out
either after the RB is obtained or at the same time.

QO Evolutionary learning of KB components and
inference engine parameters. This comprises a special
case, in which both the adaptive inference engine and
the KB components are optimized. The main idea is to
achieve the best synergy between the former elements,
including both in a simultaneous learning process.

b) Evolutionary tuning. Tuning involves an a-posteriori

optimization of the DB or the inference engine parame-

74 IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE | FEBRUARY 2019

ters. The RB is initially obtained by using a predefined

DB and inference engine. Two different approaches have

been proposed:

i) Evolutionary tuning of KB parameters. The
parameters of the fuzzy sets are tuned in the evolution-
ary process.

ii) Evolutionary adaptive inference engine. It is divided
into two groups depending on whether it is applied to the
inference system or the defuzzification method. In the
former case, the final objective is to obtain a higher coop-
eration among fuzzy rules by acting on the inference
engine. The linguistic rule interpretability is maintained as
the DB remains homogeneous. In the latter case, if a
weighted average operator is used in the defuzzifier, its
parameters can be optimized by means of EAs.

2) Objectives Trade-off: Approaches for Jointly

Optimizing Several Objectives

As seen in Section I, there is a growing interest in developing
FRBSs that are both accurate and interpretable [30], [31]. How-

ever, this goal is not easy to achieve, as these criteria are usually in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidad de Jaen. Downloaded on May 12,2021 at 10:47:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
conflict. A smart solution is to carry out the learning procedure
by means of MOEAs [22]. MOEAs generate a set of FRBSs
with different trade-offs between the different learning objectives
being considered in the optimization process. This solution is
known as MOEFPS [23], which can consider any metric of per-
formance to carry out the optimization of the FRBSs, namely
the cost, or the simplicity or comprehensibility, among others.

A short description of these techniques based on the multi-
objective nature of the problem is given in what follows. In
case of using MOEFSs for learning or tuning FRBS compo-
nents, the reader should refer to those models introduced in the
previous section.

QO) Performance vs. Interpretability. Fuzzy systems in gen-
eral, and fuzzy linguistic models in particular, are well suit-
ed to understanding the nature of the problem that they
represent. For this reason, it is quite important to consider
different interpretability measures as an estimation of the
FRBS potential.

An FRBS is not interpretable per se. Instead, there are
many different issues which must be taken into account in
order to obtain a human-interpretable structure. Among
others, the rule base compactness or the semantic compre-
hensibility of the fuzzy partitions should be considered.
Hence, the ML method used to learn the fuzzy model, clas-
sifier, or decision support systems must be properly designed
to obtain the desired trade-off for the problem at hand.

Specifically, two different options can be taken into
account. On the one hand, those which are based on the
simplicity could be considered, i.e. the dimensionality, of the
system (the simpler, the better). On the other hand, seman-
tic-based metrics could be considered, i.e. the comprehensi-
bility of the derived system.

QO Performance vs. Performance. When addressing a con-
trol system problem, there are more constraints that must be
taken into account than there are for standard data mining
tasks. Specifically, there is a need to obtain an efficient con-
troller, with proper stability and, if possible, to have a com-
pact and interpretable structure. Therefore, the use of
MOEAs for designing fuzzy controllers has become a very
successful approach.

In this case, both the structure of the controller and its
parameters must be obtained. This implies a direct adaptation
for all methods previously introduced for general EFSs. Spe-
cifically, a post-processing tuning step is the most common
approach due to its simplicity and reduced search space.

3) New Representations: Fuzzy Sets Extensions
In several applications, where the degree of uncertainty is very
high, traditional fuzzy sets are not able to provide an appropri-
ate representation of the hidden knowledge. To cope with this
aspect, some extensions such as type-2 fuzzy sets and interval-
valued fuzzy sets are used instead.

Being special cases of fuzzy set representations, there is no
established way of obtaining their parameter values and/or their

structure. For this reason, EAs are a proper tool for the design

strategy and/or for optimizing these fuzzy models. For example,
the parameters of type-2 fuzzy sets may be optimized from a
given standard fuzzy set, or by considering the direct generation
from data. Recent approaches are aimed at tuning rules and

conditions using this kind of fuzzy representation [32], [33].

IIL What Evolutionary Fuzzy

Systems Should Be Used For?

In the introduction of this manuscript, several interesting prop-
erties of fuzzy systems were highlighted. In short, they provide
two interesting features making them very useful for knowl-
edge representation tasks:

1) On the one hand, the inherent interpretability of the sys-
tem. This refers to two different aspects. First, the intrinsic
comprehensibility associated with the use of a simple
description mechanism in the form of fuzzy linguistic rules,
very close to natural language. And second, the comprehen-
sibility and understandability of the rule-based system and
the inference procedure.

2) On the other hand, the robustness of adapting to and learn-
ing from complex problems, i.e. to model scenarios which
are difficult to represent with other types of paradigms. In
particular, it is a very interesting tool to apply when users
must deal with the lack of data or uncertainty in the defini-
tion of the input data.

In regards to the aspects associated with the interpretability
of FRBSs, first the “cointension” term must be highlighted,
defined between fuzzy sets and regular concepts [34]. In partic-
ular, Lofti A. Zadeh emphasized that this semantic cointension
was the key for understanding the success of the application of
fuzzy models, namely the importance of the human compo-
nent in the data science process [15]. This is what can be
referred to as human-centric modeling and decision making,
which implies the need to provide descriptive models and
decision support systems able to comprehend the underlying
human mental processes in order to manage the information in
a more human-oriented style [35]. Human-centric models and
descriptive support systems allow the designer to use the com-
prehensibility of the designed solutions to both understand the
underlying human reasoning processes and uncover knowledge
about the system at hand, as well as to enhance the problem
solving [15].

Although the use of linguistic labels provides a solid basis
for achieving both facets, many model induction techniques
that use fuzzy systems can impose certain interpretability con-
straints (linguistic structure, rule length, and rule set size, among
others) in the search for greater accuracy. It is at this point
where EFS algorithms can be used to find a good trade-off
between interpretability and accuracy [30], [31].

As previously discussed in detail in Section II-B, this can be
done in one out of two phases. On the one hand, in the con-
struction of the model itself, i.e. during the learning process.
On the other hand, a posteriori, i.e. once the model has been
obtained, a component tuning can be carried out. In both

cases, the properties associated with EAs in regards to the

FEBRUARY 2019 | IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE 75

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidad de Jaen. Downloaded on May 12,2021 at 10:47:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 

Analyzing these properties in detail, the key ability

of Evolutionary Fuzzy Systems is to obtain a Machine
Learning system incorporating the fundamental
property of what was defined as eXplainable Artificial
Intelligence. It is not only about understanding the
composition of the model, but also about the fact that
the system is able to explain to the user the process it

followed to make the output decision.

coding of different types of information provide a clear benefit:
flexibility [29]. In fact, they permit optimizing from simple
parameters of fuzzy systems to complete sets of rules. The prac-
titioner will therefore be able to directly pair the necessary
interpretability constraints while generating a model with a
high predictive power [30], [31].

Analyzing these properties in detail, the key ability of EFS
is to obtain an ML system incorporating the fundamental
property of what was defined as XAI [12]. It is not only about
understanding the composition of the model, but also about
the fact that the system is able to explain to the user the pro-
cess it followed to make the output decision. Therefore, the
synergy between fuzzy systems and the ability of EAs to learn
them makes EFSs a very appealing tool for a large number of
problems. As an example of these developments, one may
refer to the EFS design that allows the fusion mechanism for
a classifier ensemble to be interpreted by the human designer
thanks to a hierarchical fuzzy rule-based structure [36].

Focusing on the robustness properties associated with EFSs,
the first aspect to be taken into account is their effectiveness in
extracting information that resides in small datasets with low
density in the domain, the so-called “lack of data” problem [37].
The reason is simple: by defining the universe of discourse of
the fuzzy variables along the overall domain of the attributes
that represent the problem, an integral coverage of the input
space is allowed. Furthermore, when there is some overlap
between the fuzzy sets, a smoother transition among the mod-
eled information granules is expected to be obtained.

In addition to the lack of data, the benefits of EFSs in han-
dling imprecise and uncertain data is also of high priority. In
these cases, the flexibility of the definition of fuzzy partitions as
well as the membership functions must be taken into account.
In this sense, it is natural to use different extensions to the tra-
ditional type-1 fuzzy sets to add an extra level of freedom in
the representation. However, defining the exact values accord-
ing to the problem may not be a trivial task performed by a
human operator. Thus, it is of great interest to be able to rely
on the use of EAs to learn or adjust the components of the
fuzzy DB.

It should be stressed that social network analysis or social
mining are application areas that may benefit the most from
EFSs [38]. It has become a hot topic in the last few years due to

76 IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE | FEBRUARY 2019

the increase of social media interactions. Cor-
porations and academia are very interested in
conceptualizing, modeling, analyzing, explain-
ing, and predicting these relationships. There is
a natural connection between graph theory,
on which social network analysis is based, and
fuzzy set theory. This allows providing an
easier and more robust way to express rela-
tionships among nodes in these networks.
Furthermore, some research has already dis-
cussed the theoretical and conceptual models
for social data based on fuzzy sets [39], [40].

Another area in which the inherent uncer-
tainty of the data imposes a difficult restriction, and also requires
interpretable models in order to be truly useful to the end-users,
is finance. In this environment, the comprehension of how inputs
and outputs are related to each other is crucial in order to be
able to make operative and strategic decisions. Therefore, EFSs
have been successfully applied to many financial domains [41].

Decisions in medical applications are also considered to be
critical. Therefore, any action taken by experts must be taken
confidently. This implies that any decision support system used
in this context must be trustworthy and transparent. In other
words, it must explain to both the doctor and the patient, the
reasons behind a particular diagnosis. In this sense, an EFS
based on fuzzy linguistic rules might be the proper choice [42].

Finally, current solutions focused on intrusion detection sys-
tems are high priority. The reason for this is clear, namely the
vast use of information systems and the need of establishing
security policies and rules that allow an undesired system access
to be discriminated. In particular, EFS-based approaches are
very interesting for several reasons. First of all, this type of prob-
lem has a common structure. Indeed, they are described by
numeric data and therefore crisp thresholds can lead to low
detection accuracy. Additionally, the boundary between legit
and abnormal behavior is inherently fuzzy. In other words,
small changes in an intrusion behavior may not be recognized,
whereas a small deviation in a normal profile can generate a
false alarm. In accordance with the former, several relevant EFS
approaches based on fuzzy linguistic variables may be found in
the specialized literature [43].

IV. Where are Evolutionary Fuzzy

Systems Going? Future Prospects

From Section II, the reader might acknowledge that EFS-based
methods have come a long way since the pioneering proposal
of the first EFS-based methods more than 25 years ago. Exten-
sive research has been carried out in this field, mainly due to
the versatility associated with the learning and tuning of the
different components of the FRBS.

Now, researchers and practitioners must look ahead to discern
what the future objectives and challenges in the EFS field could
be. The open directions for novel research are particularly associat-
ed with two basic pillars: (1) efforts focused on the novel optimi-
zation. of the internal components of the FRBS (Section IV-A);

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidad de Jaen. Downloaded on May 12,2021 at 10:47:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
and (2) analysis of the application of EPSs to emerging work sce-
narios in data science (Section IV-B). Finally, the particular char-
acteristics of this big data scenario imply paying special attention
to the design and development of EFSs (Section IV-C).

A. Optimization of Novel FRBS’ Components
There is a wide variety of FRBS elements whose values can be
optimized using an EFS. Enumerating some possibilities, we
should stress the choice of relevant inputs, scaling factors, member-
ship functions, shape functions, granularity, fuzzy rules, inference
parameters, number of rules, and so on. In addition, as previously
described the power of EAs permits the joint learning of several of
these components so as to obtain a much more robust FRBS.
However, it must be highlighted once again that for current
applications it is not useful to generate models with excessively
complex components. In other words, special attention must be
paid to maintain the comprehensibility of the models. For this
reason, the evolution of the multiple components of an FRBS
must always be carried out considering the semantic properties

and simplicity of the obtained system.

B. Emerging Data Science Scenarios for EFS

Data science is a quite recent field of study, and it is still rapidly
expanding. New problems and practical applications arise and
require the development of robust techniques to address new
complex paradigms. Specifically, novel problems are usually
characterized by: i) uncertainty, the available information is
often imprecise, uncertain, noisy, or there might be an acute lack
of information; the objective of the modeling or decision prob-
lem is ambiguous and the problem structure might be loosely
specified; and the problem environment may be not stationary
but changing; ii) the impressively increasing problem dimen-
sions, requiring prohibitive computational times to achieve
problem tractability; and iti) the need to provide descriptive
models and decision support systems able to comprehend the
underlying human mental processes to manage the information
in a more human-oriented style (numan-centric modeling and
decision making) [44]. EFSs have excelled in many different sce-
narios and, in accordance with this general good behavior, a
bright future for their use in most of the incoming data science
areas can be predicted.

A first case-study is related to non-standard classification
problems, such as those based on multi-label and multi-instance
learning. In the former case, the model must classify a query
instance in a set of non-exclusive categories [45]. In the latter,
incomplete information about the classes or instances implies a
handicap during the categorization [46]. Thus, instances are
coupled into a single “bag”, being unaware of which is the one
that provides the true label. Finally, both problems can be com-
bined adding a higher degree of complexity to the design of
future solutions. Taking into account this type of relationship
between labels and/or instances, the nature of both problems is
well suited for the use of fuzzy sets and systems, and thus for
EFSs. However, at present just a few attempts have been made
to solve this task using these tools [47].

The novel topic related to ordinal and monotonic classifica-
tion [48] should be noted. This case study comprises those prob-
lems where both the input attributes and/or the class have a
monotonicity constraint. The first study that extracts fuzzy rules
satisfying these constraints without the need of a preprocessing
stage can be found in [49], where authors incorporate several
mechanisms based on monotonicity with EPS algorithms.

Supervised descriptive rule discovery [50], and in particular
subgroup discovery [51], [52], is also another interesting area of
study. The goal is to locate subgroups which are statistically
“most interesting” for the user. The obtained model must fulfill
some properties such as simplicity (understandable structure
with few variables), and both a high significance and support.
Another particular case of this scenario is the so-called Emerg-
ing Pattern Extraction [53], in which frequency changes signif-
icantly from one dataset to another. In this context, the use of
MOEFSs has shown that obtained rules allow the descriptions
of the emerging phenomena to be simpler than those in the
state of the art [54].

A topic that has gained much attention in the research
community of data science is multi-view learning [55], where
examples are described by multiple distinct feature sets. This is
related to the way several current-day problems are defined,
such as multimedia-content, web page classification, and bioin-
formatics. The approaches which address multi-view learning
via data integration are quite diverse.

Another interesting area of study is semi-supervised learning.
It is based on problems in which only a subset of the instances
are labeled and the algorithm can modify the output of the
training data [56]. Considered as an extension to unsupervised
learning, clustering techniques have received much attention. In
this context, the use of an FRBS can represent a sort of linguis-
tic description of the dissimilarity relation among patterns [57],
thus helping the recognition of the clusters with fewer data.

Finally, there are novel domains of application arising every-
day that share problems similar to the ones already solved in
other domains. Therefore, it can be of interest to exploit previ-
ously acquired knowledge to manage new tasks in a quick and
effective way. This is the premise of the area of research known
as transfer learning [58]."Taking advantage of fuzzy learning
methods for this task is evident, regarding the uncertainty that
is found in these dynamic environments [59]. They also allow
leveraging knowledge from some referring scenes when there
is little data available [60].

These are some of the new data science scenarios without
the aim of being very exhaustive. The previous analysis illus-
trates that there are not enough scientific studies using EPSs for
such novel and significant topics. Therefore, this must be
regarded as a “call-to-action” for current researchers in the area
of EPSs to open the way in such promising lines of study, from
both the theoretical and practical points of view.

C. EFSs in Big Data: A Significant Topic for the Near Future

One of the hottest topics for current research is related to data
science and big data problems [4]. An in-depth analysis of the

FEBRUARY 2019 | IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE 77

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidad de Jaen. Downloaded on May 12,2021 at 10:47:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 

In spite of the impressive capacity of black-box
solutions to obtain accurate models, this virtue is
often associated with a higher system complexity.
Designers are often unable to understand how the
systems work, and also to decipher why they

produce a certain output.

current state of this framework was carried out in both [61]
and [62], where authors reported the good properties of fuzzy
systems when dealing with such types of applications. However,
focusing on the case of EPSs for big data, so far few studies
have been developed in this area of research [63]-[65].

The main reason for the lack of proposals in the special-
ized literature is the difficulty in reaching solutions that are
scalable within the EFS paradigm. Indeed, this constraint is
associated with the computation of an accuracy-based fitness
function from data at the core of the evolutionary procedure.
In other words, it is not straightforward to develop method-
ologies that allow the whole dataset to be handled in a rea-
sonable time.

Por this reason, the development of learning and tuning
methods must be redirected within a distributed environment.
To this end, MapReduce has established as a de-facto solution
to simplify the implementation of these techniques [66].

It is basically an execution environment which lays over
a distributed and fault-tolerant file system, HDFS being
the most common option. By means of two simple func-
tions, Map and Reduce, any implementation can be auto-
matically parallelized in a transparent way for the programmer.
The first function allows operating on independent “chunks”
of data, by applying the same procedure. The second merg-
es the outputs of the Map functions to produce a single
final output.

According to the new MapReduce paradigm of distributed
programming, any ML solution can be categorized into two
main types [67]:

1) Local approaches (also known as approximate models)
that work directly on the distributed chunks of data by
creating partial models that are then aggregated.

2) Global approaches (also known as exact models) that iter-
ate over all examples to generate the model or build the
system iteratively by optimal merging.

By analyzing the properties of each of these types of meth-
odologies some very interesting insights could be achieved.

Local approaches are a priori easier to develop than the
original algorithm would be embedded in the different Map
tasks. However, it would imply a greater effort in the merging
phase of the independent sub-models (Reduce function).
Another advantage is an expected efficiency increase when
augmenting the number of partitions. The main hitch, in this
case, would be to work with a smaller number of data in each

of the sub-processes. Fortunately, the good behavior of

78 IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE | FEBRUARY 2019

FRBSs and EFSs with respect to such an
eventuality has been previously highlighted
[62] (see Section III).

Global approaches, on the other hand, have
as their main virtue the learning of more
robust models. This is a theoretical issue as
they comprise the analysis of the complete set
of data. However, this is precisely their major
disadvantage. Specifically, more effort must be
devoted to design the methodology to meet
the conditions of correctness. In addition to the former, the
efficiency can also be reduced as the process must be iterated
several times.

A very interesting option in this case is to take advantage of
the features of novel environments such as Spark [68]. It is a dis-
tributed computing platform that provides a memory-intensive
scheme, being very suitable for ML algorithms [67]. Specifically, it
supports very versatile data structures, together with a wide range
of operations for transforming them, such as filtering, grouping, or
set operations, among others.

When referring to big data constraints for the development
of novel ML approaches, the efforts are mainly focused on
finding scalable solutions considering only one-side of the Vol-
ume, namely the “Big Instance Size”. However, there is anoth-
er significant issue in this regard, which is known as the “Big
Dimensionality” explosion [69]. There are diverse ways to face
this problem, including smart feature selection [70], fuzzy
ensemble models based on bagging for vertically partitioning
the training set [71], [72], and the use of fuzzy decision trees
that internally consider a feature ranking mechanism [73].

As it has been discussed throughout this section, the
task of addressing big data problems with EFSs is still far
from being fully covered. Many state-of-the-art learning
and tuning approaches need to be redesigned and translat-
ed into the new MapReduce paradigm. The objective is to
take advantage of the power and quality that these algo-
rithms have already shown, but using the new applications
and current-day data sets. Furthermore, researchers must
be aware of this circumstance to be more ambitious and
develop new robust methodologies by taking into account
the new functionalities available in the current program-
ming environments. As a final remark, the difficulties asso-
ciated with this framework imply the development of
much more ingenious and effective ideas to achieve greater

milestones in this area of research.

V. Remarks on the Need for Interpretable

and Explainable Artificial Intelligence

Throughout this paper, it has been stressed that there are two
main criteria any practitioner must consider when determining
what kind of ML techniques should be used to address a spe-
cific regression, classification, or decision-making problem:
accuracy and interpretability/explainability. Of course, the ideal
situation would be to obtain jointly high degrees of both but,

since they are in conflict, this is a complex task. Figure 3 shows

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidad de Jaen. Downloaded on May 12,2021 at 10:47:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 

 
   
   

Neural Nets

  
    

Deep

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Learning

 
 
 
    
  

 

Bayesian
Belief Models

  

Statistical

Models SVMs

     
  

    
   

AOGs

Markov
Models

  

 

Dp
oO
Graphical g A © Current Value
Mosels 3 O Desired Value
<} 50—»0
Ensemble Challenge
Methods

   
 
 
     

Decision
Trees

(Fuzzy) Rule Based
Systems

 

mol > i
_
La

 

$$$ >
Explainability

     
   

 

 

FIGURE 3 Accuracy vs. explainability: Venn diagram for several ML models (partially inspired from [74]).

this fact with a trade-off for some well-known ML techniques
and the current challenge to increase the explainability without
reducing accuracy. For the most interpretable models the chal-
lenge is to increase both axes.

In practice, one of the two properties usually prevails over
the other (use of black-box vs. white- or gray-box models/
classifiers). Driven by the need for accuracy, we are witnessing
an emerging trend to embrace “black-box” solutions, in partic-
ular those based on neural networks and mainly Deep Learning
(DL) [75], [76]. In short, these systems are based on a number
of layers of fully-connected neurons. The first layers are devoted
to extracting simpler attributes from the data, which are then
combined in the subsequent layers to form more complex and
thus more representative attributes. In spite of the impressive
capacity of these black-box solutions to obtain accurate models,
this virtue is often associated with a higher system complexity.
Designers are often unable to understand how the systems
work, and also to decipher why they produce a certain output.
In fact, the effectiveness of the existing ML methods could be
limited by the machines’ inability to explain its thoughts and
actions to human users in some application fields, and thus may
lead to unsafe and incorrect decisions’.

Interpreting and explaining deep networks is a young and
emerging field of research. In [17] can be found a study of
techniques for interpreting complex machine learning models,
with focus on DL. Most of the proposals have focused on

 

*hetps://www.statnews.com/2018/07/25 /ibm-watson-recom mended-unsafe-incorrect-
treatments/

post-hoc interpretability but greater efforts are required in the
near future to understand the ML models.

In this scenario, rule-based systems [77] allow to audit the
extracted knowledge with a double objective. On the one
hand, obtaining a clear explanation of the cognition process
carried out by the system. On the other hand, being able to
trust in the description of the rules and their relationship with
the problem that is aimed to be solved. In particular, EFSs
combine the ability to represent knowledge in natural way for
human understanding (with fuzzy rules), the strength of fuzzy
reasoning and the ability of EAs for search in complex and ill-
defined problems. However, it must be emphasized that
FRBSs must remain simple and understandable, since they are
not interpretable per se [78]. It is important to take account of
different issues in order to obtain FRBSs that represent
knowledge easily understood by humans. Among others, the
tule base compactness or the semantic comprehensibility of
the fuzzy partitions must be stressed. Moreover, the EFSs must
be properly designed to obtain the desired trade-off between
accuracy and explainability for the problem at hand. When in
the EFS design more attention is paid to the accuracy than to
explainability, the skills of the fuzzy system obtained are hardly
comparable with other preferable and more complex solutions
such as DL.

DL is a powerful paradigm that can effectively capture rele-
vant features, in particular for those problems from which a
higher level of abstraction is needed to describe the hidden
knowledge [76]. In any way, DL solutions must not be consid-
ered to be rivals for FRBSs and EFSs, but rather as comple-

mentary approaches, each one with their strengths and

FEBRUARY 2019 | IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE 79

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidad de Jaen. Downloaded on May 12,2021 at 10:47:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 

Machine Learning methods based on Evolutionary
Fuzzy Systems preserve the original essence of
comprehensibility exposed by Zadeh, also boosting

 

ies.

 

their modeling abi

drawbacks. A promising step forward the achievement of this
objective could be to make use of the good interpretability
properties of EFSs in conjunction with DL.

There are some interesting examples of the positive synergy
between both paradigms. First, a fuzzy classifier based on stack-
ing is proposed in [79]. It embeds a zero-order TSK FRBS
with a limited number of linguistic labels within a neuron-lay-
ered representation. Thus, each layer becomes a single model
within the “ensemble”. After the learning stage using a DL
procedure, rules can be simply extracted from each “neuron” to
keep the original interpretability. A different approach is pro-
posed in [80]. It comprises a hierarchical system composed of a
fuzzy rule layer, to manage the ambiguity of the data, and a DL
layer, to reduce the noise and to create higher order variables
for a more accurate representation. Then, both parts are fused
leading to a more robust classification. Finally, an interpretable
structure for DL networks is also proposed in [81].‘To achieve
the required explainability, zero-order TSK fuzzy linguistic
rules are encoded and learned in the final layer of the net to
perform the final classification, just after the feature extraction.

In summary, EFSs are a very significant tool in many fields of
application where the explainability of the decision must be
taken into account.The reader should refer to areas such as med-
ical diagnosis, financial problems, or security systems, among oth-
ers. It is straightforward to acknowledge that, in these scenarios,
the same importance must be given to the accuracy/confidence
of the output and the explainability of the decision made. In
other words, ML models based on EFSs are a desirable choice
when the output is intended to be trusted by the human user.

VI. Concluding Remarks
The world of data science has changed the way applications are
approached. At present, the core of the model not only aims to
achieve the highest possible accuracy but also to make it explain-
able for researchers and practitioners. In this sense, ML methods
based on EFSs preserve the original essence of comprehensibility
exposed by Zadeh, also boosting their modeling abilities. It is
straightforward to acknowledge that this provides several advan-
tages over other paradigms toward handing XAI learning models
including transparency, understanding and comprehensibility.
Throughout this work, a variety of perspectives for under-
standing the virtues of EFSs have been identified. A series of “4
W questions” (why, when, what for, and where to) have
been posed. The objective was that the answers provide some
insight into the capabilities that EPSs have shown when being
adapted to different research areas, and to promote new devel-

opments in the discipline.

80 IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE | FEBRUARY 2019

It has allowed us to notice the lack of una-
nimity in the literature about XAI concepts,
their formal definition, quantitative measures
and relations among them. There are currently
numerous coexisting approaches to interpret-
ability/explainability. Por this reason, there is a
need for a debate within the Al, ML and
fuzzy communities to standardize and to assess
these concepts and the auxiliary properties than let to interpret
and explain properly the AI models and outputs.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to ennoble Prof. Lofti A. Zadeh’s figure,
both from a personal and a professional viewpomt. They would
like to acknowledge the pioneering development of the fuzzy sets
and systems research area and the strong positive influence Prof.
Zadeh played for its development during more than
50 years. The authors are very proud of having met and collabo-
rated with Prof. Zadeh in many different activities both at the
University of Granada and the European Centre for Soft Com-
puting. They had the chance to recognize how Lotfi was not only
an impressive researcher with a visionary mind but, and even
more important, an outstanding human being. He will be missed.
This work have been partially supported by the Spanish
Ministry of Science and Technology under projects TIN2015-
68454-R, TIN2015-67661-P, and TIN2017-89517-P, including
European Regional Development Funds.

References

[1] F. Bacon, Meditationes Sacrae. Excusum impensis Humfredi Hooper, 1597.

[2] M. I. Jordan and T. M. Mitchell, “Machine learning: Trends, perspectives, and pros-
pects,” Science, vol. 349, no. 6245, pp. 255-260, 2015.

[3] V. Dhar, “Data science and prediction,” Commun. Assoc. Comput. Mach., vol. 56, pp.
64-73, 2013.

[4] A. Fernandez, S. Rio, V. Lopez, A. Bawakid, M. J. del Jesus, J. M. Benitez, and F.
Herrera, “Big data with cloud computing: An insight on the computing environment,
MapReduce and programming framework,” WIREs Data Mining Knowl. Discovery, vol.
4, no. 5, pp. 380-409, 2014.

[5] L. A. Zadeh, “Fuzzy sets,” Inf Control, vol. 8, pp. 338-353, 1965.

[6] H. Ishibuchi, T. Nakashima, and M. Nii, Classification and Modeling with Linguistic
Information Granules. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2005.

[7] E. H. Mamdani and S. Assilian, “An experiment in linguistic synthesis with a fuzzy
logic controller,” Iat. J. Man-Mach. Stud., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1-13, 1975.

[8] A. E. Eiben and J. E. Smith, Introduction to Evolutionary Computation. Berlin, Germany:
Springer-Verlag, 2003.

[9] J. H. Holland, Adaptation ia Natural and Artificial Systems. Ann Arbor, MI, USA: Uni-
versity of Michigan Press, 1975.

[10] A. Freitas, Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery with Evolutionary Algorithms. ser. Natu-
ral Computing Series. Berlin: Springer, 2002.

[11] W. Samek, T. Wiegand, and K. R. Miiller, “Explainable artificial intelligence:
Understanding, visualizing and interpreting deep learning models,” CoRR, vol.
abs/1708.08296, 2017. [Online]. Available: http://www.arxiv.org/abs/1708.08296. Ac-
cessed on: Nov. 21, 2018.

[12] D. Castelvecchi, “Can we open the black box of AI?” Nature, vol. 538, no. 7623, pp.
20-23, 2016.

[13] S. F. Bryce Goodman, “European Union regulations on algorithmic decision-making
and a right to explanation,” Artif. Intell. Mag., vol. 38, no. 3, 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.08813v3. Accessed on: Nov. 21, 2018.

[14] F. Doshi-Velez and B. Kim, “Towards a rigorous science of interpretable machine
learning,” CoRR, vol. abs/1702.08608, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/
abs/1702.08608. Accessed on: Nov. 21, 2018.

[15] M. Gleicher, “A framework for considering comprehensibility in modeling,” Big
Data, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 75-88, 2016.

[16] Z. C. Lipton, “The mythos of model interpretability,” CoRR, vol. abs/1606.03490,
2017. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.03490. Accessed on: Nov. 21,
2018.

[17] G. Montavon, W. Samek, and K. R. Miiller, “Methods for interpreting and under-
standing deep neural networks,” Dig. Signal Process., vol. 73, pp. 1-15, 2018.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidad de Jaen. Downloaded on May 12,2021 at 10:47:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
[18] M. W. Craven, “Extracting comprehensible models from trained neural networks,”
Thesis, Univ. Wisconsin, 1996.

[19] R. S. Michalski, “A theory and methodology of inductive learning,” Artif. Intell., vol.
20, pp. 111-161, 1983.

[20] M. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “Why should I trust you?” explaining the
predictions of any classifier,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, 2016, pp. 1135-1144.

[21] ©. Cordon, F. Herrera, F. Hoffmann, and L. Magdalena, Genetic Fuzzy Systems Evo-
lutionary Tuning and Learning of Fuzzy Knowledge Bases. Singapore: World Scientific, 2001.
[22] C. A. Coello-Coello, G. Lamont, and D. van Veldhuizen, Evolutionary Algorithms
for Solving Multi-Objective Problems, 2nd ed., ser. Genetic and Evolutionary Computation.
Berlin: Springer, 2007.

[23] M. Fazzolari, R. Alcala, Y. Nojima, H. Ishibuchi, and F. Herrera, “A review of the
application of multi-objective evolutionary systems: Current status and further direc-
tions,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 45-65, 2013.

[24] C. Karr, “Genetic algorithms for fuzzy controllers,” Artif. Intell. Expert, vol. 6, no.
2, pp. 26-33, 1991.

[25] M. Valenzuela~-Rendon, “The fuzzy classifier system: A classifier system for con-
tinuously varying variables,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Genetic Algorithms, 1991, pp. 346-353.
[26] P. Thrift, “Fuzzy logic synthesis with genetic algorithms,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf.
Genetic Algorithms, 1991, pp. 509-513.

[27] D. T. Pham and D. Karaboga, “Optimum design of fuzzy logic controllers using
genetic algorithms,” J. Syst. Exg., vol. 1, pp. 114-118, 1991.

[28] ©. Cordon, “A historical review of evolutionary learning methods for Mamdani-type
fuzzy rule-based systems: Designing interpretable genetic fuzzy systems,” Int. J. Approx.
Reason., vol. 52, no. 6, pp. 894-913, 2011.

[29] A. Fernandez, V. Lopez, M. J. del Jesus, and F. Herrera, “Revisiting evolutionary
fuzzy systems: Taxonomy, applications, new trends and challenges,” Knowl. Based Syst.,
vol. 80, pp. 109-121, 2015.

[30] J. M. Alonso, L. Magdalena, and G. Gonzilez-Rodriguez, “Looking for a good fuzzy
system interpretability index: An experimental approach,” Int. J. Approx. Reason., vol. 51,
pp. 115-134, 2009.

[31] M. J. Gacto, R. Alcala, and F. Herrera, “Interpretability of linguistic fuzzy rule-
based systems: An overview of interpretability measures,” Inf. Sei., vol. 181, no. 20, pp.
4340-4360, 2011.

[32] J. Sanz, D. Bernardo, F. Herrera, H. Bustince, and H. Hagras, “A compact evolution-
ary interval-valued fuzzy rule-based classification system for the modeling and prediction
of real-world financial applications with imbalanced data,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst., vol.
23, no. 4, pp. 973-990, 2015.

[33] K. Tai, A.-R. El-Sayed, M. Biglarbegian, C. I. Gonzalez, ©. Castillo, and S.
Mahmud, “Review of recent type-2 fuzzy controller applications,” Algorithms, vol. 9,
no. 2, 2016.

[34] L. A. Zadeh, “Is there a need for fuzzy logic?” Inf. Sdi., vol. 178, no. 13, pp. 2751—
2779, 2008.

[35] P. Guo and W. Pedrycz, Eds., Human-Centric Decision-Making Models for Social Sciences,
vol. 502, ser. Studies in Computational Intelligence. New York, NY, USA: Springer,
2014.

[36] K. Trawinski, O. Cordon, L. Sanchez, and A. Quirin, “A genetic fuzzy linguistic
combination method for fuzzy rule-based multi-classifiers,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst., vol.
21, no. 5, pp. 950-965, 2013.

[37] V. Lopez, A. Fernandez, S. Garcia, V. Palade, and F. Herrera, “An insight into classi-
fication with imbalanced data: Empirical results and current trends on using data intrinsic
characteristics,” Inf. Sci., vol. 250, no. 20, pp. 113-141, 2013.

[38] G. Bello-Orgaz, J.J. Jung, and D. Camacho, “Social big data: Recent achievements
and new challenges,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 28, pp. 45-59, 2016.

[39] S. Bastani, A. K. Jafarabad, and M. H. F. Zarandi, “Fuzzy models for link prediction
in social networks,” Int. J. Intell. Syst., vol. 28, no. 8, pp. 768-786, 2013.

[40] M. Dragoni and G. Petrucci, “A fuzzy-based strategy for multi-domain sentiment
analysis,” Int. J. Approx. Reason., vol. 93, pp. 59-73, 2018.

[41] M. Antonelli, D. Bernardo, H. Hagras, and F. Marcelloni, “Multiobjective evolu-
tionary optimization of type-2 fuzzy rule-based systems for financial data classification,”
IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 249-264, 2017.

[42] S. A. Mokeddem, “A fuzzy classification model for myocardial infarction risk assess-
ment,” Appl. Intell., vol. 48, no. 5, pp. 1233-1250, 2018.

[43] S. Elbag, A. Fernandez, A. Altalhi, S. Alshomrani, and F. Herrera, “A multi-objective
evolutionary fuzzy system to obtain a broad and accurate set of solutions in intrusion
detection systems,” Soft Comput., in press.

[44] M. Chen, F. Herrera, and K. Hwang, “Cognitive computing: Architecture, tech-
nologies and intelligent applications,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 19774-19783, 2018.

[45] F. Herrera, F. Charte, A. J. Rivera, and M. J. del Jesus, Multilabel Classification: Problem
Analysis, Metrics and Techniques. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2016.

[46] F. Herrera, S. Ventura, R. Bello, C. Cornelis, A. Zafra, D. S. Tarragé, and S. Vluy-
mans, Multiple Instance Learning: Foundations and Algorithms. New York, NY, USA: Spring-
er, 2016.

[47] S. Vluymans, D. Sanchez-Tarrago, Y. Saeys, C. Cornelis, and F. Herrera, “Fuzzy
multi-instance classifiers,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst., vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 1395-1409, 2016.
[48] W. Kotlowski and R. Slowinski, “On nonparametric ordinal classification with
monotonicity constraints,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 2576-2589,
2013.

[49] J. Alcala-Fdez, R. Alcala, S. Gonzalez, Y. Nojima, and S. Garcia, “Evolutionary
fuzzy rule-based methods for monotonic classification,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst., vol. 25,
no. 6, pp. 1376-1390, 2017.

[50] P. K. Novak, N. Lavrac, and G. I. Webb, “Supervised descriptive rule discovery: A
unifying survey of contrast set, emerging pattern and subgroup mining,” J. Mach. Learn.
Res., vol. 10, pp. 377-403, 2009.

[51] W. Klésgen, “Explora: A multipattern and multistrategy discovery assistant,” in Proc.
Advances Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining American Association for Artificial Intelligence,
1996, pp. 249-271.

[52] F. Herrera, C. J. Carmona, P. Gonzalez, and M. J. Del Jesus, “An overview on sub-
group discovery: Foundations and applications,” Knowl. Inf. Syst., vol. 29, no. 3, pp.
495-525, 2011.

[53] G. Dong and J. Li, “Mining border descriptions of emerging patterns from dataset
pairs,” Knowl. Inf. Syst., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 178-202, 2005.

[54] A. M. Garcia-Vico, C. J. Carmona, P. Gonzalez, and M. J. del Jesus, “MOEA-EFEP:
Multi-objective evolutionary algorithm for the extraction of fuzzy emerging patterns,”
IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst., vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 2861-2872.

[55] J. Zhao, X. Xie, X. Xu, and S. Sun, “Multi-view learning overview: Recent progress
and new challenges,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 38, pp. 43-54, Nov. 2017.

[56] I. Triguero, S. Garcia, and F. Herrera, “Self labeled techniques for semi-supervised learn-
ing: Taxonomy, software and empirical study,” Knowl. Inf Syst., vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 245-284,
2013.

[57] M. G. C. A. Cimino, B. Lazzerini, and F. Marcelloni, “A novel approach to fuzzy
clustering based on a dissimilarity relation extracted from data using a T'S system,” Pattern
Revog., vol. 39, no. 11, pp. 2077-2091, 2006.

[58] S. J. Pan and Q. Yang, “A survey on transfer learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.,
vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 1345-1359, 2010.

[59] J. Shell and S. Coupland, “Fuzzy transfer learning: Methodology and application,”
Inf. Sai., vol. 293, pp. 59-79, 2015.

[60] H. Zuo, G. Zhang, W. Pedrycz, V. Behbood, and J. Lu, “Fuzzy regression transfer
learning in Takagi-Sugeno fuzzy models,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst., vol. 25, no. 6, pp.
1795-1807, 2017.

[61] A. Fernandez, C. J. Carmona, M. J. del Jesus, and F. Herrera, “A view on fuzzy
systems for big data: Progress and opportunities,” Int. J. Comput. Intell. Syst., vol. 9, no.
1, pp. 69-80, 2016.

[62] A. Fernandez, A. Altalhi, S. Alshomrani, and F. Herrera, “Why linguistic fuzzy rule
based classification systems perform well in big data applications?” Int. J. Comput. Intell.
Syst., vol. 10, pp. 1211-1225, 2017.

[63] 1. Rodriguez-Fdez, M. Mucientes, and A. Bugarin, “S-FRULER: Scalable fuzzy rule
learning through evolution for regression,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 110, pp. 255-266, 2016.
[64] A. Ferranti, F. Marcelloni, A. Segatori, M. Antonelli, and P. Ducange, “A distributed
approach to multi-objective evolutionary generation of fuzzy rule-based classifiers from
big data,” Inf Sci., vol. 415-416, pp. 319-340, 2017.

[65] F. Pulgar-Rubio, A. J. Rivera-Rivas, M. D. Pérez-Godoy, P. Gonzalez, C. J. Car-
mona, and M. J. del Jesus, “MEFASD-BD: Multi-objective evolutionary fuzzy algorithm
for subgroup discovery in big data environments: A MapReduce solution,” Knowl.-Based
Syst., vol. 117, pp. 70-78, 2017.

[66] K. H. Lee, Y. J. Lee, H. Choi, Y. D. Chung, and B. Moon, “Parallel data processing
with MapReduce: A survey,” SIGMOD Rec., vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 11-20, 2011.

[67] S. Ramirez-Gallego, A. Fernandez, S. Garcia, M. Chen, and F. Herrera, “Big data:
Tutorial and guidelines on information and process fusion for analytics algorithms with
MapReduce,” Inf Fusion, vol. 42, pp. 51-61, 2018.

[68] M. Hamstra, H. Karau, M. Zaharia, A. Konwinski, and P. Wendell, Learning Spark:
Lightning-Fast Big Data Analytics. O’Reilly Media, 2015.

[69] Y. Zhai, YS. Ong, and I. W. Tsang, “The emerging “big dimensionality,” IEEE
Comput. Intell. Mag., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 14-26, 2014.

[70] S. Ramirez-Gallego, H. Mourifio-Talin, D. Martinez-Rego, V. Bolén-Canedo, J.
M. Benitez, A. Alonso-Betanzos, and F. Herrera, “An information theory-based feature
selection framework for big data under apache spark,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man, Cybern.
Syst., vol. 48, no. 9, pp. 1441-1453, 2018.

[71] P. Bonissone, J. M. Cadenas, M. Carmen Garrido, and R. Andrés Diaz-Valladares, “A
fuzzy random forest,” Int. J. Approx. Reason., vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 729-747, 2010.

[72] K. Trawiski, O. Cordén, and A. Quirin, “On designing fuzzy rule-based multiclas-
sification systems by combining FURIA with bagging and feature selection,” Int. J. Un-
certainty Fuzziness Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 589-603, 2011.

[73] A. Segatori, F. Marcelloni, and W. Pedrycz, “On distributed fuzzy decision trees for
big data,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 174-192, 2018.

[74] D. Gunning, “Explainable artificial intelligence (XAI),” Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency, DAR PA/120, 2017.

[75] Y. Lecun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature, vol. 521, no. 7553,
pp. 436-444, 2015.

[76] Z. C. P. L. Q. Zhang and L. T. Yang, “A survey on deep learning for big data,” Inf.
Fusion, vol. 42, pp. 146-157, 2018.

[77] ]. Fiirnkranz, D. Gamberger, and N. Lavrac, Foundations of Rule Learning. New York,
NY, USA: Springer, 2012.

[78] L. I. Kuncheva, “How good are fuzzy if-then classifiers?” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man,
Cybern. B, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 501-509, 2000.

[79] T. Zhou, F.-L. Chung, and S. Wang, “Deep TSK fuzzy classifier with stacked gener-
alization and triplely concise interpretability guarantee for large data,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy
Syst., vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 1207-1221, 2017.

[80] Y. Deng, Z. Ren, Y. Kong, F. Bao, and Q. Dai, “A hierarchical fused fuzzy deep neural
network for data classification,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst., vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 1006-1012, 2017.
[81] P. Angelov and X. Gu, “A cascade of deep learning fuzzy rule-based image classifier
and SVM,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Systems Man and Cybernetics, 2017, pp. 746-751. J

FEBRUARY 2019 | IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE MAGAZINE 81

Authorized licensed use limited to: Universidad de Jaen. Downloaded on May 12,2021 at 10:47:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
