Check for
updates

Explainable Artificial Intelligence:
Concepts, Applications, Research
Challenges and Visions

Luca Longo\=)@®, Randy Goebel?@®, Freddy Lecue®“*@®, Peter Kieseberg’®,
and Andreas Holzinger?°®

' School of Computer Science, Technological University Dublin, Dublin, Ireland

luca. longo@tudublin.ie

2 xAl-Lab, Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute, University of Alberta,

Edmonton, Canada
rgoebel@ualberta.ca
3 Tnria, Sophia Antipolis, Biot, France
freddy.lecue@inria.fr
* Thales, Montreal, Canada
® JRC Blockchains, University of Applied Sciences St. Pélten, Sankt Pélten, Austria
Peter. Kieseberg@fhstp.ac.at
© Human-Centered AI Lab, Institute for Medical Informatics, Statistics
and Documentation, Medical University Graz, Graz, Austria
andreas. holzinger@medunigraz.at

Abstract. The development of theory, frameworks and tools for
Explainable AI (XAI) is a very active area of research these days, and
articulating any kind of coherence on a vision and challenges is itself a
challenge. At least two sometimes complementary and colliding threads
have emerged. The first focuses on the development of pragmatic tools for
increasing the transparency of automatically learned prediction models,
as for instance by deep or reinforcement learning. The second is aimed
at anticipating the negative impact of opaque models with the desire
to regulate or control impactful consequences of incorrect predictions,
especially in sensitive areas like medicine and law. The formulation of
methods to augment the construction of predictive models with domain
knowledge can provide support for producing human understandable
explanations for predictions. This runs in parallel with AI regulatory
concerns, like the European Union General Data Protection Regulation,
which sets standards for the production of explanations from automated
or semi-automated decision making. Despite the fact that all this research
activity is the growing acknowledgement that the topic of explainability
is essential, it is important to recall that it is also among the oldest fields
of computer science. In fact, early AI was re-traceable, interpretable,
thus understandable by and explainable to humans. The goal of this
research is to articulate the big picture ideas and their role in advancing
the development of XAI systems, to acknowledge their historical roots,
and to emphasise the biggest challenges to moving forward.

© IFIP International Federation for Information Processing 2020
Published by Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020

A. Holzinger et al. (Eds.):; CD-MAKE 2020, LNCS 12279, pp. 1-16, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-57321-8_1
2 L. Longo et al.

Keywords: Explainable artificial intelligence - Machine learning -
Explainability

1 Introduction

Machine learning is often viewed as the technology belonging to the future
in many application fields [46], ranging from pure commodities like recom-
mender systems for music, to automatic diagnosis of cancer or control models
for autonomous transportation. However, one fundamental issue lies within the
realm of explainability [60]. More precisely, most of the existing learning algo-
rithms can often lead to robust and accurate models from data, but in application
terms, they fail to provide end-users with descriptions on how they built them,
or to produce convincing explanations for their predictions [7]. In many sensi-
tive applications, such as in medicine, law, and other sectors where the main
workers are not computer scientists or engineers, the direct application of these
learning algorithms and complex models, without human oversight, is currently
inappropriate. The reasons are not only technical, like the accuracy of a model,
its stability to decisions and susceptibility to attacks, but often arise from soci-
ological concerns, practically settling on the issue of trust. In fact, one of the
principal reasons to produce an explanation is to gain the trust of users [13].
Trust is the main way to enhance the confidence of users with a system [66] as
well as their comfort while using and governing it [41]. Trust connects to ethics
and the intensity of regulatory activities, as for instance the General Data Pro-
tection Regulation in the European Union, leads to many legal and even ethical
questions: responsibility for safety, liability for malfunction, and tradeoffs therein
must inform decision makers at the highest level. Many methods of explainabil-
ity for data-driven models have emerged in the years, at a growing rate. On
the one hand, a large body of work have focused on building post-hoc methods
mainly aimed at wrapping fully trained models, often referred to black-boxes,
with an explainability layer [37]. A smaller body of research works, on the other
hand, have concentrated on creating self-explainable and interpretable models
by incorporating explainability mechanisms during their training, often referred
to as the ante-hoc phase [7]. Despite the fact that all this research activity is
the growing acknowledgement of the topic of explainability [68], by now referred
to as Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAT) [54], it is important to recall that
it is also among the oldest fields of computer science. In fact, early AI was re-
traceable, interpretable, thus understandable by and explainable to humans. For
these reasons, many scholars have tried to review research works in the field
[1,3,22,51,72]. These reviews reveals the needs for a variety of kinds of explana-
tion, for the identification of methods for explainability and their evaluation as
well as the need to calibrate the tradeoffs in the degree or level of explanation
appropriate for a broad spectrum of applications.

The goal of this research is to articulate the big picture ideas and their role
in advancing the development of XAI systems, to acknowledge their historical
roots, and to emphasise the biggest challenges to moving forward. The reminder
XAI: Concepts, Applications, Research Challenges and Visions 3

of the paper focuses on relevant notions and concepts for explainability in Sect. 2.
It then continues in Sect. 3 with descriptions on the applications of methods for
XAI and on domains and areas in which these can have a significant impact.
A discussion on the research challenges surrounding XAI is presented in Sect. 4.
Eventually, recommendations and visions follow by presenting what we believe
scholars should focus on in the development of future explainable AI systems.

2 Notions and Related Concepts

A serious challenge for any attempt to articulate the current concepts for XAI
is that there is a very high volume of current activity, both on the research side
(22,66, 72], and in aggressive industrial developments, where any XAI functions
can provide a market advantage to all for profit applications of AI [23,60]. In
addition, there remains a lack of consensus on terminology, for example as noted
within, there are a variety of definitions for the concept of interpretation, but
little current connection to the formal history, that means in formal theories of
explanation or causation [30]. One recent paper [4] provides an organizing frame-
work based on comparing levels of explanation with levels of autonomous driving.
The goal is to identify foundational XAI concepts like relationships to historical
work on explanation, especially scientific ones, or the importance of interactive
explanation as well as the challenge of their evaluation. Note further that the
need for a complex system to provide explanations of activities, including pre-
dictions, is not limited to those with components created by machine learning
(example in [53]). Pragmatically, the abstract identification of a scientific expla-
nation that enables an explainee to recreate an experiment or prediction can arise
in very simple circumstances. For example, one can evaluate an explanation by
simply noting whether it is sufficient to achieve an explainee’s intended task. For
example, in Fig. 1, the pragmatic value of an Ikea visual assembly “explanation”
is whether the assembler explainee can achieve the assembly using the diagram.

Overall and within this broad spectrum of ideas related to explanation, there
is some focus on the foundational connection between explanation and that of
abductive reasoning. For example, the historical notion of scientific explanation
has been the subject of much debate in the community of science and philosophy
[70]. Some propose that a theory of explanation should include both scientific
and other simpler forms of explanation. Consequently, it has been a common goal
to formulate principles that can confirm an explanation as a scientific one. Aris-
totle is generally considered to be the first philosopher to articulate an opinion
that knowledge becomes scientific when it tries to explain the causes of “why.”
His view urges that science should not only keep facts, but also describe them
in an appropriate explanatory framework [15]. In addition to this theoretical
view, empiricists also maintain a belief that the components of ideas should
be acquired from perceptions with which humans become familiar through sen-
sory experience. The development of the principles of scientific explanation from
this perspective prospered with the so-called Deductive-Nomological (DN) model
that was described by Hempel in [24-26], and by Hempel and Oppenheim in [27].
4 L. Longo et al.

There is a more pragmatic AI historical research thread that connects scien-
tific explanation to AI implementations of abductive reasoning. One such thread,
among many, begins with Pople in 1973 [59], Poole et al. in 1987 [58], Muggleton
in 1991 [52], to Evans et al. in 2018 [14]. Pople described an algorithm for abduc-
tion applied to medical diagnosis. Poole et al. provided an extension to first order
logic which could subsume non-monotonic reasoning theories and also identify
explanatory hypothesis for any application domain. Muggleton proposed a fur-
ther refinement referred to as inductive logic programming where hypotheses
are identified by inductive constraints within any logic, including higher-order
logics. Finally, the adoption of this thread of reasoning have been generalised
to explanation based on inductive logic programming by Evans et al. [14]. This
most recent work connects with information theoretic ideas used to compare dif-
ferences in how to learn probability distributions that are modeled by machine
learning methods.

Interpreting and explaining a model trained from data by employing a
machine learning technique is not an easy task. A body of literature has focused
on tackling this by attempting at defining the concept of interpretability. This has
lead to the formation of many types of explanation, with several attributes and
structures. For example, it seems to human nature to assign causal attribution
of events [23], and we possess an innate psychological tendency to anthropomor-
phism. As a consequence, an Al-based system that purports to capture causal
relations should be capable of providing a causal explanation of its inferential
process (example in [55]). Causality can been considered a fundamental attribute
of explainability, especially when scientific explainability carries a responsibility
to help the explainee reconstruct the inferential process leading to a prediction.
Many have noted this role on how explanations should make the causal relation-
ships between the inputs and the outputs of a model explicit [17,30,41,51].

Despite the fact that data-driven models are extremely good at discover-
ing associations in the data, unfortunately they can not guarantee causality of
these associations. The objective of significantly inferring causal relationships
depends on prior knowledge, and very often some of the discovered associations
might be completely unexpected, not interpretable nor explainable. As pointed
by [1], the decisions taken considering the output of a model should be clearly
explainable to support their justifiability. These explanations should allow the
identification of potential flows both in a model, enhancing its transparency, the
knowledge discovery process, supporting its controllability and improvement of
its accuracy. Although the importance of explainability is clear, the definition of
objective criteria to evaluate methods for XAI and validate their explanations
is still lacking. Numerous notions underlying the effectiveness of explanations
were identified from the fields of Philosophy, Psychology and Cognitive Science.
These were related to the way humans define, generate, select, evaluate and
present explanations [50].
XAI: Concepts, Applications, Research Challenges and Visions 5

3 Applications and Impact Areas

Explainable artificial intelligence has produced many methods so far and it has
been applied in many domains, with different expected impacts [21]. In these
applications, the production of explanations for black box predictions requires
a companion method to extract or lift correlative structures from deep-learned
models into vocabularies appropriate for user level explanations. Initial activities
focused on deep learning image classification with explanations emerging as heat
maps created on the basis of gaps in probability distributions between a learned
model and an incorrect prediction [5]. However, the field has become so diverse
in methods, often determined by domain specific issues and attributes, that it
is scarcely possible to get in-depth knowledge on the whole of it. Additionally,
one major aspect though is the problem of explainable AI, where lot of problems
have been emerged and illustrated in the literature, especially from not being
able to provide explanations. While all of these topics require long and in-depth
discussions and are certainly of significant importance for the future of several
AI methods in many application domains, we want to focus on the benefits
that can be reaped from explainability. This means not focusing on the issues
of incomplete and imperfect technologies as a stopping point for applications,
but discussing novel solutions provided by explainable AI. A discussion of some,
partly prominent and partly surprising examples follows, with arguments on why
a certain amount of explainability - as a reflection - is required for more advanced
AI. There are many sectors that already have fully functional applications based
on machine learning, but still serious problems in applying them exist. These
are often caused by failing to be capable to explain how these methods work.
In other words, it is known that they work, but the concrete results cannot
be explained. Many of these applications either come from safety critical or
personally sensitive domains, thus a lot of attention is put on explanations of
the inferences of trained models, usually predictions or classifications.

Threat Detection and Triage - The detection of threats and efficient triage
have been core topics in the area of IT-Security for at least the past three
decades. This started with research in the area of code analysis and signature
based AntiVirus-Software, moving towards automated decompilation and code
analysis, as well as supporting the automated analysis of network monitoring
information for triage. Currently, fully automated threat detection and triage is
not available in real life systems due to the complexity of the task and the prob-
lem with false positives, even though several different approaches exist. These
also include strategies that do not try to detect actual threats, but rather filter-
ing out all known legit network travel and thus drastically reducing the amount
of information requiring manual analysis [56]. Still, a major problem without
explainability lies in the opaque nature of these methods, thus not being able
to fully understand their inner functioning and how an inference was reached.
Explainability could greatly enhance the detection capabilities, especially since
dynamic effects, such as changing user behavior, could be modelled and intro-
duced earlier into the algorithms without generating a large set of false positives.
6 L. Longo et al.

Explainable Object Detection - Object detection is usually performed from
a large portfolio of artificial neural networks (ANN) architectures such as YOLO,
trained on large amount of labelled data. In such contexts, explaining object
detections is rather difficult if not impossible due to the high complexity of the
hyperparameters (number of layers, filters, regularisers, optimizer, loss function)
of the most accurate ANNs. Therefore, explanations of an object detection task
are limited to features involved in the data and modeled in the form of saliency
maps [11] or at best to examples [40], or prototypes [35]. They are the state-
of-the-art approaches but explanations are limited by data frames feeding the
ANNs. Industrial applications embedding object detection, such as obstacles
detection for trains, do require human-like rational for ensuring the system can
be guaranteed, even certified [39].

Protection Against Adversarial ML - In adversarial machine learning,
attackers try to manipulate the results of learning algorithms by inserting specif
ically crafted data in the learning process [32], in order to lead a model to learn
erroneous things. Detection of such a manipulation is not trivial, especially
in contexts with big data, where no model exists before the analysis phase.
While there are several proposals on how to deal with this issue [16], some
of them employ neural sub-networks for differentiating between malicious and
benign input data like [49]. In this specific circumstance, explainability would
have a great impact as it will support the task of uncovering such a manip-
ulation far more quickly, efficiently and without actually finding the examples
that have been manipulated, thus greatly enhancing trust in machine learning
inferences [31].

Open Source Intelligence (OSINT) - In Open Source Intelligence [19], infor-
mation retrieval is purely reduced to openly available information, as contrary to
Signals Intelligence (SIGINT). However, there are several major issues surround-
ing OSINT, especially referring to context, languages and the amount of informa-
tion available. Similarly, another problem lies in deciding how much a source is
trusted, and what level of impact news of sources shall have on the result of their
aggregations. This is especially important when considering adversarial attacks
against OSINT methods and systems [12]. Explainability could provide means
for detecting these attacks, with an impact on mitigating their influence. Further-
more, the information that an attack against an intelligent system was launched
is also a valuable input from an intelligence perspective, so explainability might
lead to additional valuable information. However, not all false information exists
due to malice, especially when reporting very recent events: information parti-
cles might be wrong, misleading or simply unknown at the time of reporting.
OSINT becomes especially complex in case of ongoing events, where facts change
every minute, either due to knew intelligence, or simply because of changes in
the event itself. Explainability would allow to estimate the effects of incorrect
information particles on the overall machine learning outcomes, thus allowing,
for instance, to give error margins on reported numbers.
XAI: Concepts, Applications, Research Challenges and Visions 7

Trustworthy (autonomous) Medical Agents - Several architectures for
integrating machine learning into medical decision making have been devised
in the past. These are based upon a doctor-in-the-loop approach whereby doc-
tors act as input providers to machine learning algorithms. These can lead to
suggestions related to diagnosis or treatment that can be subsequently reviewed
by the doctors themselves, who, in turn, can provide feedback in a loop to fur-
ther enhance modeling [34]. Additionally, the mechanism can also introduces
external knowledge to support decision making aimed at incorporating the latest
findings in the underlying medical field.

Autonomous Vehicles - While certainly being developed within machine
learning, explainability would be beneficial for the area of autonomous vehicles,
especially considering autonomous cars. In cases of car accidents, explanations
can help trace the reasons why an autonomous vehicle behaved in a certain why
and took certain actions. Consequently this can not only lead to safer vehicles,
but it also can help solve issues in court faster, greatly enhancing trust towards
these novel ML-based technologies and especially the resulting artifacts [20].

4 Research Challenges

A number of research challenges surrounding the development of methods for
explainability exist, including technical, legal and practical challenges.

4.1 Technical Challenges

XAI Systems Evaluation. The comprehensive study of what explanation
means from a sociological viewpoint [50] begs a difficult issue that is both tech-
nical and non-technical: how does one evaluate the quality of an explanation? It is
not a surprise that the quality or value of an explanation is at least partly deter-
mined by the receiver of an explanation, sometimes referred to as the “explainee”.
An easy way to frame the challenge of evaluating explanations, with respect to
an explainee, arises from observing the history of the development of evaluation
techniques from the field of data visualization [36]. A simple example of “visual
explanation” can frame the general evaluation problem for all explanations as
follows. Consider the IKEA assembly diagram, rendered in Fig. 1. A simple list of
requirements to assess explanation quality emerges from considering the IKEA
assembly instructions as a visual explanation of how to assemble the piece of
furniture. In this case, the visual explanation is intended to guide all explainees,
and not just a single individual, to the successful assembly of the furniture item.
One measure of quality is simply to test whether any individual explainee can
use the visual explanation to complete the assembly. Another measure is about
whether the visual explanation is clear and unambiguous, so that the assembly
is time efficient. In the case of Fig. 1, the sequencing of steps might be misinter-
preted by an explainee, and that the simple use of circular arrows to indicate
motion may also be ambiguous.
8 L. Longo et al.

 

Fig. 1. An IKEA visual explanation for furniture assembly

Overall, and as anticipated in the general evaluation of explanation sys-
tems, one could design cognitive experiments to determine, over an experimental
human cohort, which portions of the explanation clearly lead to correct infer-
ences, and those which are more difficult to correctly understand. This means
that XAI system requirements should include the need to produce an explicit rep-
resentation of all the components in a way that supports the appropriate inter-
pretation of the visual classification of components. One can generalize visual
explanations to the full repertoire that might obtain for a general XAI system.
This means a set of representations of the semantics of an underlying domain of
application that can provide support to construct an explanation that is under-
stood by a human explainee.

XAI Interpretation. Even though XAI systems are supposed to expose the
functioning of a learning technique as well as a set of justification of a model’s
inferences, it remains rather difficult for a human to interpret them. Explanations
are not the final words of an intelligent system but rather the intermediate layer
that requires knowledge expertise, context and common-sense characterization
for appropriate and correct human interpretation and decision-making [44,64].
Semantics, knowledge graphs [38] and their machine learning representations
[6] or similar technical advancements are interesting avenues to be considered
for pushing the interpretation at the next right level of knowledge expertise.
These might also include the addition of argumentative capabilities, as applied
in [45,61] to produce rational and justifiable explanations [62].

4.2 Legal Challenges

While the theoretical ground work in AI stays on the very theoretical side and
is thus typically considered to be not problematic from a legal point of view,
the actual application of XAI methods in a certain domain can have serious
legal implications. This is especially important when considering working with
sensitive information. Here, it has yet to be researched whether the explainabil-
ity related to a model might be used to infer information about individuals, for
instance, by using it with slightly different data sets. This technique has been
used in many variations in IT-Security, especially considering anonymized data
XAI: Concepts, Applications, Research Challenges and Visions 9

sets or partially released sensitive information as a basis to gather more intelli-
gence on the people involved [9]. Similar attacks have already been proposed and
carried out against machine learned models [65] and these allowed to produce a
great amount of information, hidden correlations and causalities that were used
to infer sensitive information.

Concepts like federated machine learning are built on the notion of executing
machine learning algorithms locally on sensitive data sets and then exchanging
the resulting feature sets in order to be combined centrally. These are in contrast
to more traditional approaches that collect all sensitive data centrally and then
run the learning algorithms. One challenge for federated machine learning is to
achieve model robustness but greatly focus on protective sensitive inferences.
This justifies the need for more applicable anonymisation techniques, as many
of the current methods are unsuitable for many application scenarios, either due
to performance or quality issues [47,48]. In addition, other legal challenges exist
such as the right to be forgotten [67]. This ‘reflects the claim of an individual
to have certain data deleted so that third persons can no longer trace them’.
This fair right is accompanied by technical difficulties ranging from the issue
related to the deletion of entries in modern systems, to the problem of inferring
information on individuals from aggregates and especially the removal of said
individuals from the aggregation process.

Despite the aforementioned challenges, positive benefits can be brought by
explainability to the area of machine learning and AI as a whole with respect to
legal issues. While the issue of transparency, a key requirement in the General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), can be a rather a hard issue to tackle, this
could change with explainability providing detailed insight, where, when and to
what extent personal data of a single individual was involved in a data analysis
workflow [69]. While this is currently not a binding requirement to provide that
level of details [69], this could be a game changer regarding acceptance of AI,
as well as increasing privacy protection in a data driven society. Furthermore, a
significant problem currently tackled in machine learning is bias [71], especially
since simple methods for tackling the issue have shown to be ineffective [33].
Explainability could support this combat and thus provide a better legal standing
for the results derived from data driven systems, especially when used for socio-
economic purposes.

4.3 Practical Challenges

One of the most crucial success factors of AI generally and XAI specifically, is
to ensure effective human-AlI interfaces to enable a usable and useful interac-
tion between humans and AI [2]. Such goals have been discussed in the HCI
community for decades [10], but it was not really seen as important in the Al
community. Now the needs and demands of XAJI for ‘explainable user interfaces’
may finally stimulate to realise advanced human-centered concepts similar to the
early visions of Vannevar Bush in 1945 [8]. Here, the goal is to explore both the
explainability side, that means the artificial explanation generated by machines,
as well as the human side, that means the human understanding. In an ideal
10 L. Longo et al.

world, both machine explanations and human understanding would be identical,
and congruent with the ground truth, which is defined for both machines and
humans equally. However, in the real world we face two significant problems:

— the ground truth cannot always be fully defined, as for instance when con-
cerned with medical diagnoses [57| when there is high uncertainty;

— human models such as scientific, world, problem solving models, are often
based on causality, in the sense of Judea Pearl [55], which is very challenging
as current machine learning does not incorporate them and simply follows
pure correlation.

Practically speaking, current XAI methods mainly focus on highlighting input—
relevant parts, for example via heat-mapping, that significantly contributed to
a certain output, or the most relevant features of a training data set that influ-
enced the most the model accuracy. Unfortunately, they do not incorporate the
notion of human model, and therefore there is a need to take also into account
the concept of causability [30]. In detail, in line with the concept of usability [28],
causability is defined as ‘the extent to which an explanation of a statement to a
human expert achieves a specified level of causal understanding with effective-
ness, efficiency and satisfaction in a specified context of use and the particular
contextual understanding capabilities of a human’. Following this concept, it
becomes possible to measure the quality of explanations in the same terms as
usability (effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction in a specified context of use),
for example with a measurement scale [29].

5 Recommendations and Visions

Machine learning, as a solid research area within artificial intelligence, has
undoubtedly impacted the field by providing scholars with a robust suite of
methods for modeling complex, non-linear phenomena. With the growing body of
work in the last decade on deep learning, this impact has significantly expanded
to many applications areas. However, despite the widely acknowledged capability
of machine and deep learning to allow scholars to induce accurate models from
data and extract relevant patterns, accelerating scientific discovery [18], there
is the problem of their interpretability and explainability. For this reason, the
last few years have seen a growing body of work on research in methods aimed
at explaining the inner functioning of data-driven models and the learning tech-
niques used to induce them. Currently and generally recognised as a core area of
AI, eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) has produced a plethora of methods
for model interpretability and explainability. Hundred of scientific articles are
published each month in many workshops, conferences and presented at sympo-
sium around the world. Some of them focus on wrapping trained models with
explanatory layers, such as knowledge graphs [39]. Other try to embed the con-
cept of explainability during training, and some of them try to merge learning
capabilities with symbolic reasoning [43]. Explainability is a concept borrowed
XAI: Concepts, Applications, Research Challenges and Visions 11

from psychology, since it is strictly connected to humans, that is difficult to oper-
ationalise. A precise formalisation of the construct of explainability is far from
being a trivial task as multiple attributes can participate in its definition [61].
Similarly, the attributes might interact with each other, adding complexity in
the definition of an objective measure of explainability [42,63]. For these reasons,
the last few years have seen also a growing body of research on approaches for
evaluating XAI methods. In other words, approaches that are more focused on
the explanations generated by XAI solutions, their structure, efficiency, efficacy
and impact on humans understanding.

The first recommendation to scholars willing to perform scientific research
on explainable artificial intelligence and create XAI methods is to firstly focus
on the structure of explanations, the attributes of explainability and the way
they can influence humans. This links computer science with psychology. The
second recommendation is to define the context of explanations, taking into
consideration the underlying domain of application, who they will serve and
how. Ultimately, explanations are effective when they help end-users to build a
complete and correct mental representation of the inferential process of a given
data-driven model. Work on this direction should also focus on which type of
explanation can be provided to end-users, including textual, visual, numerical,
rules-based or mixed solutions. This links computer science with the behavioural
and social sciences. The third recommendation is to clearly define the scope of
explanations. This might involve the creation of a method that provide end-users
with a suite of local explanations for each input instance or the formation of a
method that focuses more on generating explanations on a global level aimed
at understanding a model as a whole. This links computer science to statistics
and mathematics. The final recommendation is to involve humans, as ultimate
users of XAT methods, within the loop of model creation, exploitation, as well as
the enhancement of its interpretability and explainability. This can include the
development of interactive interfaces that allow end-users to navigate through
models, understanding their inner logic at a local or global level, for existing
or new input instances. This links artificial intelligence with human-computer
interaction.

The visions behind explainable artificial intelligence are certainly numerous.
Probably the most important is the creation of models with high accuracy as well
as high explainability. The trade-off between these two sides is well known, and
usually, increments in one dimension means decrements in the other dimension.
Creating interpretable and explainable models that are also highly accurate is
the ideal scenario, but since this has been demonstrated to be a hard problem
with currents methods of learning and explainability, further research is needed.
One possible solution is the creation of models that are fully transparent at all
stages of model formation, exploitation and exploration and that are capable
of providing local and global explanations. This leads to another vision, which
is the use of methods that embed learning capabilities and symbolic reasoning.
The former is aimed at generating models and representations with high accu-
racy for predictive and forecasting purposes, while the latter to explain these
12

L. Longo et al.

representations in highly interpretable natural language terms, aligned to the
way human understand and reason.

Acknowledgements. R.Goebel would like to acknowledge the support of the Alberta
Machine Intelligence Institute, which is one of the three Pan Canadian AI Centres.
A.Holzinger would like to acknowledge the support of the Austrian Science Fund
(FWF), Project: P-32554 “Explainable AI - A reference model of explainable Arti-
ficial Intelligence for the Medical Domain”.

References

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

. Adadi, A., Berrada, M.: Peeking inside the black-box: a survey on explainable

artificial intelligence (XAI). IEEE Access 6, 52138-52160 (2018)

. Amershi, S., et al.: Guidelines for human-AI interaction. In: Proceedings of the

2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM (2019)

. Arras, L., Osman, A., Miller, K.R., Samek, W.: Evaluating recurrent neural net-

work explanations. In: Proceedings of the 2019 ACL Workshop BlackboxNLP:
Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, Florence, Italy, pp. 113-
126. Association for Computational Linguistics (2019)

. Atakishiyev, S., et al.: A multi-component framework for the analysis and design

of explainable artificial intelligence. (arXiv:2005.01908v1 [cs.AI]) (2020)

. Babiker, H.K.B., Goebel, R.: An introduction to deep visual explanation. In: NIPS

2017 - Workshop Interpreting, Explaining and Visualizing Deep Learning (2017)

. Bianchi, F., Rossiello, G., Costabello, L., Palmonari, M., Minervini, P.: Knowledge

graph embeddings and explainable AI. CoRR, abs/2004.14843 (2020)

. Biran, O., Cotton, C.: Explanation and justification in machine learning: a survey.

In: IJCAI 2017 Workshop on Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI), Melbourne,
Australia, pp. 8-13. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Inc.
(2017)

. Bush, V.: As we may think. Atl. Mon. 176(1), 101-108 (1945)
. Cai, Z., He, Z., Guan, X., Li, Y.: Collective data-sanitization for preventing sensi-

tive information inference attacks in social networks. IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure
Comput. 15(4), 577-590 (2016)

Card, S.K., Moran, T.P., Newell, A.: Psychol. Hum. Comput. Interact. Erlbaum,
Hillsdale (NJ) (1983)

Chang, C.-H., Creager, E., Goldenberg, A., Duvenaud, D.: Interpreting neural
network classifications with variational dropout saliency maps. Proc. NIPS 1(2),
1-9 (2017)

Devine, S.M., Bastian, N.D.: Intelligent systems design for malware classification
under adversarial conditions. arXiv preprint, arXiv:1907.03149 (2019)

Dzindolet, M.T., Peterson, $.A., Pomranky, R.A., Pierce, L.G., Beck, H.P.: The
role of trust in automation reliance. Int. J. hum. Comput. Stud. 58(6), 697-718
(2003)

Evans, R., Greffenstette, E.: Learning explanatory rules from noisy data. J. Artif.
Intell. Res. 61, 1-64 (2018)

Falcon, A.: Aristotle on causality. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (2006).
(https: //plato.stanford.edu

Feinman, R., Curtin, R.R., Shintre, $., Gardner, A.B.: Detecting adversarial sam-
ples from artifacts. arXiv preprint, arXiv:1703.00410 (2017)
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.
27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

XAI: Concepts, Applications, Research Challenges and Visions 13

Fox, M., Long, D., Magazzeni, D.: Explainable planning. In: IJCAI 2017 Work-
shop on Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI), Melbourne, Australia, pp. 24-30.
International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Inc (2017)

Gil, Y., Greaves, M., Hendler, J., Hirsh, H.: Amplify scientific discovery with arti-
ficial intelligence. Science 346(6206), 171-172 (2014)

Glassman, M., Kang, M.J.: Intelligence in the internet age: the emergence and
evolution of open source intelligence (OSINT). Comput. Hum. Behav. 28(2), 673-
682 (2012)

Glomsrud, J.A., @degardstuen, A., Clair, A.L.S., Smogeli, @.: Trustworthy versus
explainable AI in autonomous vessels. In: Proceedings of the International Seminar
on Safety and Security of Autonomous Vessels (ISSAV) and European STAMP
Workshop and Conference (ESWC) 2019, pp. 37-47. Sciendo (2020)

Goebal, R., et al.: Explainable AI: the new 42? In: Holzinger, A., Kieseberg, P.,
Tjoa, A.M., Weippl, E. (eds.) CD-MAKE 2018. LNCS, vol. 11015, pp. 295-303.
Springer, Cham (2018). https: //doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-99740-7_21

Guidotti, R., Monreale, A., Ruggieri, S., Turini, F., Giannotti, F., Pedreschi, D.: A
survey of methods for explaining black box models. ACM Comput. Surv. (CSUR)
51(5), 93:1-93:42 (2018)

Ha, T., Lee, $., Kim, S.: Designing explainability of an artificial intelligence sys-
tem. In: Proceedings of the Technology, Mind, and Society, p. 1, article no. 14,
Washington, District of Columbia, USA. ACM (2018)

Hempel, C.G.: The function of general laws in history. J. Philos. 39(2), 35-48
(1942)

Hempel, C.G.: The theoretician’s dilemma: a study in the logic of theory construc-
tion. Minnesota Stud. Philos. Sci. 2, 173-226 (1958)

Hempel, C.G.: Aspects of Scientific Explanation. Free Press, New York (1965)
Hempel, C.G., Oppenheim, P.: Studies in the logic of explanation. Philos. Sci.
15(2), 135-175 (1948)

Holzinger, A.: Usability engineering methods for software developers. Commun.
ACM 48(1), 71-74 (2005)

Holzinger, A., Carrington, A., Miiller, H.: Measuring the quality of explanations:
the System Causability Scale (SCS). KI - Kiinstliche Intelligenz 34(2), 193-198
(2020). https: //doi.org/10.1007/s13218-020-00636-z

Holzinger, A., Langs, G., Denk, H., Zatloukal, K., Mueller, H.: Causability and
explainability of artificial intelligence in medicine. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Data
Min. Knowl. Discov. 9(4), e1312 (2019)

Holzinger, K., Mak, K., Kieseberg, P., Holzinger, A.: Can we trust machine learning
results? Artificial intelligence in safety-critical decision support. ERCIM NEWS
112, 42-43 (2018)

Huang, L., Joseph, A.D., Nelson, B., Rubinstein, B.I., Tygar, J.D.: Adversarial
machine learning. In: Proceedings of the 4th ACM workshop on Security and arti-
ficial intelligence, pp. 43-58 (2011)

Kamishima, T., Akaho, S., Asoh, H., Sakuma, J.: Fairness-aware classifier with
prejudice remover regularizer. In: Flach, P.A., De Bie, T., Cristianini, N. (eds.)
ECML PKDD 2012. LNCS (LNAD), vol. 7524, pp. 35-50. Springer, Heidelberg
(2012). https: / /doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-33486-3_3

Kieseberg, P., Malle, B., Friihwirt, P., Weippl, E., Holzinger, A.: A tamper-proof
audit and control system for the doctor in the loop. Brain Inform. 3(4), 269-279
(2016). https: //doi.org/10.1007/s40708-016-0046-2
35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

L. Longo et al.

Kim, B., Koyejo, O., Khanna, R.: Examples are not enough, learn to criticize! Crit-
icism for interpretability. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
29: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2016, Barcelona,
Spain, 5-10 December, pp. 2280-2288 (2016)

Lam, H., Bertini, E., Isenberg, P., Plaisant, C., Carpendale, S.: Empirical studies
in information visualization: seven scenarios. IEEE Trans. Graph. Vis. Comput.
18(9), 1520-1536 (2012)

Laugel, T., Lesot, M.J., Marsala, C., Renard, X., Detyniecki, M.: The dangers
of post-hoc interpretability: unjustified counterfactual explanations. In: Proceed-
ings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
(IJCAD, Macao, China, pp. 2801-2807 2019. International Joint Conferences on
Artificial Intelligence Organization (2019)

Lécué, F.: On the role of knowledge graphs in explainable AI. Semant. Web 11(1),
41-51 (2020)

Lécué, F., Pommellet, T.: Feeding machine learning with knowledge graphs for
explainable object detection. In: Sudrez-Figueroa, M.C., Cheng, G., Gentile, A.L.,
Guéret, C., Keet, C.M., Bernstein, A., (eds.) Proceedings of the ISWC 2019 Satel-
lite Tracks (Posters & Demonstrations, Industry, and Outrageous Ideas) co-located
with 18th International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC 2019), 26-30 October
2019, Auckland, New Zealand, volume 2456 of CEUR Workshop Proceedings, pp.
277-280. CEUR-WS.org (2019)

Li, O., Liu, H., Chen, C., Rudin, C.: Deep learning for case-based reasoning through
prototypes: a neural network that explains its predictions. In: Proceedings of the
Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, (AAAI-18), 2-7 Febru-
ary 2018, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, pp. 3530-3537 (2018)

Lipton, Z.C.: The mythos of model interpretability. Commun. ACM 61(10), 36-43
(2018)

Longo, L.: Argumentation for knowledge representation, conflict resolution, defea-
sible inference and its integration with machine learning. In: Holzinger, A. (ed.)
Machine Learning for Health Informatics. LNCS (LNAD), vol. 9605, pp. 183-208.
Springer, Cham (2016). https: //doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-50478-0_9

Longo, L., Dondio, P.: Defeasible reasoning and argument-based systems in medi-
cal fields: an informal overview. In: 2014 IEEE 27th International Symposium on
Computer-Based Medical Systems, pp. 376-381. IEEE (2014)

Longo, L., Hederman, L.: Argumentation theory for decision support in health-
care: a comparison with machine learning. In: Imamura, K., Usui, S., Shirao, T.,
Kasamatsu, T., Schwabe, L., Zhong, N. (eds.) BHI 2013. LNCS (LNAD), vol. 8211,
pp. 168-180. Springer, Cham (2013). https: //doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-02753-
117

Longo, L., Kane, B., Hederman, L.: Argumentation theory in health care. In: 2012
25th International Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems (CBMS), pp.
1-6. IEEE (2012)

Makridakis, 5.: The forthcoming artificial intelligence (AI) revolution: its impact
on society and firms. Futures 90, 46-60 (2017)

Malle, B., Kieseberg, P., Holzinger, A.: Do not disturb? Classifier behav-
jor on perturbed datasets. In: Holzinger, A., Kieseberg, P., Tjoa, A.M.,
Weippl, E. (eds.) CD-MAKE 2017. LNCS, vol. 10410, pp. 155-173.
Springer, Cham (2017).  https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-66808-6_11
48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

XAI: Concepts, Applications, Research Challenges and Visions 15

Malle, B., Kieseberg, P., Weippl, E., Holzinger, A.: The right to be forgot-
ten: towards machine learning on perturbed knowledge bases. In: Buccafurri, F.,
Holzinger, A., Kieseberg, P., Tjoa, A.M., Weippl, E. (eds.) CD-ARES 2016. LNCS,
vol. 9817, pp. 251-266. Springer, Cham (2016). https: //doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
45507-5_17

Metzen, J.H., Genewein, T., Fischer, V., Bischoff, B.: On detecting adversarial
perturbations. arXiv preprint, arXiv:1702.04267 (2017)

Miller, T.: Explanation in artificial intelligence: insights from the social sciences.
Artif. Intell. 267, 1-38 (2019)

Miller, T., Howe, P., Sonenberg, L.: Explainable AI: beware of inmates running
the asylum or: how i learnt to stop worrying and love the social and behavioural
sciences. In: IJCAI Workshop on Explainable AI (XAI), Melbourne, Australia, pp.
36-42. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Inc. (2017)
Muggleton, S.: Inductive logic programming. New Generat. Comput. 8(4), 295-318
1991

Vinee I, Jannach, D.: A systematic review and taxonomy of explanations in
decision support and recommender systems. User Model. User Adap. Interact.
27(3), 393-444 (2017). https: //doi.org/10.1007/s11257-017-9195-0

Paez, A.: The pragmatic turn in explainable artificial intelligence (XAI). Mind.
Mach. 29, 1-19 (2019)

Pearl, J.: Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference, 2nd edn. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge (2009)

Pirker, M., Kochberger, P., Schwandter, S.: Behavioural comparison of systems
for anomaly detection. In: Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on
Availability, Reliability and Security, pp. 1-10 (2018)

Pohn, B., Kargl, M., Reihs, R., Holzinger, A., Zatloukal, k., Miler, H.: Towards
a deeper understanding of how a pathologist makes a diagnosis: visualization of
the diagnostic process in histopathology. In: IEEE Symposium on Computers and
Communications (ISCC 2019). IEEE (2019)

Poole, D., Goebel, R., Aleliunas, R.: Theorist: A logical reasoning system for
defaults and diagnosis. The Knowledge Frontier. Symbolic Computation (Artifi-
cial Intelligence), pp. 331-352 (1987). https: //doi.org/10.1007/978- 1-4612-4792-
0-13

Pople, H.: On the mechanization of abductive logic. In: IJCAI’1973: Proceedings
of the 3rd International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 147-152.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers (1973)

Preece, A.: Asking ”why” in AI: explainability of intelligent systems-perspectives
and challenges. Intell. Syst. Account. Financ. Manage. 25(2), 63-72 (2018)
Rizzo, L., Longo, L.: Inferential models of mental workload with defeasible argu-
mentation and non-monotonic fuzzy reasoning: a comparative study. In: Proceed-
ings of the 2nd Workshop on Advances in Argumentation in Artificial Intelligence,
co-located with XVII International Conference of the Italian Association for Artifi-
cial Intelligence, AP @AI*IA 2018, 20-23 November 2018, Trento, Italy, pp. 11-26
2018

tooo. L., Longo, L.: A qualitative investigation of the explainability of defeasible
argumentation and non-monotonic fuzzy reasoning. In: Proceedings for the 26th
AIAIT Irish Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Cognitive Science Trinity Col-
lege Dublin, 6-7 December 2018, Dublin, Ireland, pp. 138-149 (2018)

Rizzo, L., Longo, L.: An empirical evaluation of the inferential capacity of defeasible
argumentation, non-monotonic fuzzy reasoning and expert systems. Expert Syst.
Appl. 147, 113220 (2020)
64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

L. Longo et al.

Rizzo, L., Majnaric, L., Longo, L.: A comparative study of defeasible argumen-
tation and non-monotonic fuzzy reasoning for elderly survival prediction using
biomarkers. In: Ghidini, C., Magnini, B., Passerini, A., Traverso, P. (eds.) AI*IA
2018. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 11298, pp. 197-209. Springer, Cham (2018). https: //doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-03840-3_15

Shokri, R., Stronati, M., Song, C., Shmatikov, V.: Membership inference attacks
against machine learning models. In: 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Pri-
vacy (SP), pp. 3-18. IEEE (2017)

Tintarev, N., Masthoff, J.: A survey of explanations in recommender systems. In:
IEEE 23rd international conference on data engineering workshop, pp. 801-810,
Istanbul, ‘Turkey. IEEE (2007)

Villaronga, E.F., Kieseberg, P., Li, T.: Humans forget, machines remember: arti-
ficial intelligence and the right to be forgotten. Comput. Law Secur. Rev. 34(2),
304-313 (2018)

Vilone, G., Longo, L.: Explainable artificial intelligence: a systematic review.
CoRR, abs/2006.00093 (2020)

Wachter, S., Mittelstadt, B., Floridi, L.: Transparent, explainable, and accountable
AI for robotics. Sci. Robot. 2(6) (2017)

Woodward, J.: Scientific explanation. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (2003).
(https: //plato.stanford.edu

Yapo, A., Weiss, J.: Ethical implications of bias in machine learning. In: HICCS
2018, Proceedings of the 51st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
(2018)

Zhang, Q., Zhu, 8.: Visual interpretability for deep learning: a survey. Front.
Inform. Technol. Electron. Eng. 19(1), 27-39 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1631/
FITEE.1700808
